THE TALE OF SQUIRREL NUTKIN
[A Story for Norah]

This is a Tale about a
tail--a tail that belonged to a little red squirrel, and his name was
Nutkin.  He had a brother called Twinkleberry, and a great many
cousins: they lived in a wood at the edge of a lake. In the middle of
the lake there is an island covered with trees and nut bushes; and
amongst those trees stands a hollow oak-tree, which is the house of an
owl who is called Old Brown. One autumn when the nuts were ripe, and
the leaves on the hazel bushes were golden and green-- Nutkin and
Twinkleberry and all the other little squirrels came out of the wood,
and down to the edge of the lake. They made little rafts out of twigs,
and they paddled away over the water to Owl Island to gather
nuts. Each squirrel had a little sack and a large oar, and spread out
his tail for a sail. They also took with them an offering of three fat
mice as a present for Old Brown, and put them down upon his
door-step. Then Twinkleberry and the other little squirrels each made
a low bow, and said politely-- "Old Mr. Brown, will you favour us with
permission to gather nuts upon your island?"  But Nutkin was
excessively impertinent in his manners. He bobbed up and down like a
little red CHERRY, singing-- "Riddle me, riddle me, rot-tot-tote!  A
little wee man, in a red red coat!  A staff in his hand, and a stone
in his throat; If you'll tell me this riddle, I'll give you a groat."
Now this riddle is as old as the hills; Mr. Brown paid no attention
whatever to Nutkin.  He shut his eyes obstinately and went to
sleep. The squirrels filled their little sacks with nuts, and sailed
away home in the evening. But next morning they all came back again to
Owl Island; and Twinkleberry and the others brought a fine fat mole,
and laid it on the stone in front of Old Brown's doorway, and said--
"Mr. Brown, will you favour us with your gracious permission to gather
some more nuts?" But Nutkin, who had no respect, began to dance up and
down, tickling old Mr. Brown with a NETTLE and singing-- "Old Mr. B!
Riddle-me-ree!  Hitty Pitty within the wall, Hitty Pitty without the
wall; If you touch Hitty Pitty, Hitty Pitty will bite you!" Mr. Brown
woke up suddenly and carried the mole into his house. He shut the door
in Nutkin's face.  Presently a little thread of blue SMOKE from a wood
fire came up from the top of the tree, and Nutkin peeped through the
key-hole and sang-- "A house full, a hole full!  And you cannot gather
a bowl-full!" The squirrels searched for nuts all over the island and
filled their little sacks.