

Two dead in Australian university shooting

Staff and agencies
Monday October 21, 2002

A man armed with several handguns opened fire at a university in Melbourne, Australia this morning, killing two people and wounding eight more.

The man, in his mid-30s and of Asian appearance, was tackled to the ground by several students after he opened fire in a classroom at Monash University in the south of the city.

He was later arrested.

Paramedics were called to the campus's Menzies Building just before 11.30am, Australian time.

Two Asian men in their early 20s were killed and five others were taken to hospital, one with serious injuries to the stomach. Another three people were taken to the nearby Monash Medical Center with minor injuries.

Police superintendent Trevor Parks said: "He [the attacker] was in the possession of a number of handguns. He went into a classroom. It would appear there has been indiscriminate shooting following that."

Police did not say what the motive appeared to be for the killings.

Forty students have been taken to Glen Waverley police station and are helping police with their enquiries.

The university asks that people only come to the campus if strictly necessary.

The university's vice-chancellor, Peter Darvall, offered his condolences to the families and friends of those killed and injured in the shooting and praised the actions of the "brave souls" who wrestled the gun off the attacker.

He said students and staff were understandably distressed.

"The campus community is in shock but is pulling together and supporting one another at this terrible time."

"All I can say is our university is as safe or unsafe as any other part of the community," he said.

The shooting came amid heightened nervousness in Australia a week after bombs killed 180 tourists, many from Australia, in the popular Indonesian holiday island of Bali . A female student at Monash, named Samara, said she had been waiting for an Indonesian language exam when the shooting broke out on the floor above.

"We just heard these horrific screams and it was just devastating," she told Melbourne radio 3AW.

"We just heard someone go: 'Oh my god, oh my god, get out, help me, help me, get out'. We just ran straight out," she said.

Claire Fricke, a 20-year-old arts student, told Reuters news agency: "After what has happened in Bali our first thought was that there was a bomb scare. It wasn't until we got outside that someone told us that people had been shot."

Monash University has six campuses in Australia as well as one each in Malaysia and South Africa. Police said that calls had been coming in from relatives all over the world worried about family members at the university.

Counselling has been made available to staff, students and their families at the university.

All classes were cancelled today.




---
