

Message left for police as US sniper claims 12th victim

Suzanne Goldenberg in Washington
Monday October 21, 2002
The Guardian

The danger zone around America's capital expanded yesterday - in terms of both distance and timing - with a man on life support after being shot in the stomach in the 12th suspected attack by the sniper of the suburbs.

Last night the Montgomery county police chief, Charles Moose, said a message had been left at the scene of the shooting and asked the person who left it to contact police. "To the person who left us a message at the Ponderosa [restaurant] last night: you gave us a telephone number, we do want to talk to you," he said.

Saturday night's shooting took place about 90 miles south of Washington DC, the furthest afield by the deadly marksman who has prowled the city and its neighbouring counties of Maryland and Virginia for the past 19 days.

The timing of the attack also marked a departure from rou tine for the killer, who had never struck at a weekend in his string of nine murders and two grievous woundings.

But otherwise the attack bore the sniper's deadly fingerprints. The victim was shot with a single bullet as he and his wife stepped out of a steakhouse restaurant, located near an easy escape route, the exit ramp of a major motorway.

Police said the couple were passing through Ashland, Virginia, on Saturday night when they stopped for food and petrol at the Ponderosa restaurant. They were making their way through a dimly lit car park when the shot rang out.

At first the wife of the 37-year-old victim thought a car had backfired. "About that time her husband declared he had been shot, and went to his knees," said Colonel Stuart Cook, from the Hanover county sheriff's department.

The shooting - the first since last Monday - triggered the now highly ritualised "sniper response", with police shutting down main arteries and scrutinising cars as they crawled along, paralysing roads in Virginia, Maryland and Washington for four hours.

Officially police cannot link the shooting to the sniper until they examine the bullet to see if it matches the type of round and rifle used in the earlier attacks. Last night, despite several hours of surgery, the bullet was still lodged in the stomach of the victim, who was in a critical condition.

Forensic experts hoped they could still determine its calibre. "Sometimes a firearms expert can assess or approximate the calibre of a weapon by looking at x-rays," said Dr Paul Ferrara, director of Virginia's division of forensic sciences.

The attack comes at a time when the public is in near despair at the failure of police to hunt down the killer. By local crime standards the nine deaths attributed to the sniper do not constitute an epidemic. Since he set off on his deadly rampage there have been 18 other murders in Washington DC and surrounding areas - or "traditional homicides" as the police now call them.

None was given even a fraction of the attention paid to the sniper. None of the killers was hunted by thousands-strong taskforces. None of the victims received anything near the outpourings of sympathy for those killed and wounded by the serial killer. None of the killings provoked wider panic.

The sense of dread that has descended on the suburbs has deepened as the few leads pursued by police have evaporated. The national security adviser, Condoleezza Rice, told CNN the questioning of prisoners at Guantanamo Bay had dug up no evidence that al-Qaida was linked to the attacks.

Police said a bullet casing discovered in a rental van which resembled the slightly battered white vans allegedly used by the sniper did not match the ammunition used in other attacks. On Friday police filed charges against a man who fabricated his account of having seen the sniper gun down a woman in a covered car park last Monday.

As the leads dry up, the sense of panic mounts. When they return to school today children near the ring road will be kept indoors for a third week.

Meanwhile, the sense of confinement has spread to US senators who were warned last week to stay away from golf courses for fear of sniper attacks by al-Qaida.




---
