
Lowes rages as Saints clinch title thriller

Bulls seething after referee turns down last minute penalty plea

Andy Wilson at Old Trafford
Monday October 21, 2002
The Guardian

This magnificent match was marred by a sustained display of petulance by Bradford's veteran hooker James Lowes, who was still abusing the officials five minutes after the final hooter, snatched his loser's medal from the Rugby Football League's executive chairman Richard Lewis, and then walked straight back to the dressing-room rather than watch St Helens presented with the trophy. But there is no denying he had a point.

There can never have been a more blatant voluntary tackle than the way the Saints captain Chris Joynt went to ground on the penultimate play of the game, to deny Bradford any chance of regaining possession after Sean Long's drop goal 30 seconds or so earlier. Joynt even admitted afterwards that Ian Millward, his coach, had sent him back on "with a job to do, and I went out and did it".

It should have been a penalty to the Bulls 40 metres out from a reasonably central position, and with that a chance for Paul Deacon, their scrum-half who had already kicked three goals and won the Harry Sunderland Trophy as man of the match, to keep the Super League title in Bradford.

Instead Russell Smith allowed Joynt to play the ball, and almost immediately the hooter sounded. Saints were the champions for the fourth time in seven Super League seasons, had won their third grand final out of four, and also maintained the hex on Bradford - they have now beaten the Bulls in five major finals out of five in the summer era.

Millward and Joynt were understandably reluctant to discuss the voluntary tackle after such a magnificent achievement. Long had buzzed menacingly - as well as landing two excellent first-half conversions which turned out to be crucial - although there was no more influential player on the field than the hooker Keiron Cunningham, who defied the pain of a serious wrist injury to play key roles in two of their three tries.

But they must already have known they had been seriously lucky. There was no need for Joynt to risk conceding a penalty with such an obvious dive, all he had to do was take a tackle.

It was a mistake which could have ranked with Don Fox's famous missed goal from in front of the posts in the Watersplash Challenge Cup final of 1968. Instead Joynt lifted the Super League trophy for the third time.

Meanwhile Lowes was inconsolable. The 33-year-old, who only last week deferred his plans to retire and signed a new 12-month contract with the Bulls, had to be pulled away from Smith by his team-mate Michael Withers.

He then refused repeated requests from Super League officials to join his team-mates for the presentation ceremony, and instead walked alone around half of the ground, applauding the Bradford fans.

Finally, as the Bulls were invited to receive their medals, he walked slowly and deliberately across the front of the podium, pushed in behind his skipper Robbie Paul and took his medal from Lewis in the most graceless manner possible.

"Jimmy's just that type of person, he's a very emotional guy," explained Paul afterwards, with Lowes already on the bus. Bradford's coach Brian Noble usually keeps his emotions under much tighter control, but Saturday night's disappointment was too much even for him.

"Jimmy just reflected the way we all feel," said Noble. "I thought we played all the football, we were the better team, but we're sat here and we've just been dudded again. It was a gutless performance by the referee."

The feeling of injustice seething throughout the Bradford camp came not only from the Joynt incident, but from three decisions by the video referee Gerry Kershaw that went against them in the first half. Then there was a controversial penalty which allowed Saints to pull level at 18-all, 16 minutes from time.

Throw in the fact that they remain convinced they were robbed by St Helens in the 1999 grand final, when a different video referee denied Withers a try for a tiny knock-on which he denies vehemently to this day, and Lowes's behaviour is perhaps understandable - although he and Noble will still be lucky to escape punishment from the RFL this week.

There must also be a real question over whether Smith can ever referee the Bulls again. This was far from the first time they have felt "dudded" by him, with Noble particularly incensed after a defeat at Leeds midway through the season.

And although no-one would begin to question Smith's integrity - he remains easily the British game's best referee - the fact that he had a couple of years as a Bradford player in the mid-eighties before taking up the whistle puts him in a pretty difficult position in games involving his former club.

Smith suggested on Saturday night that he would not be pressing for any action to be taken against Lowes, although it is hard to remember anything remotely similar ever happening before in a sport which prides itself on the respect with which players treat the referee.

Smith then set about looking for his mobile phone, which had gone missing from the dressing room. It just was not his night.




---
