Supersizing

John Sutherland
Monday October 21, 2002
The Guardian

The jury is still out on supersizing. Vulgarly, the word associates with hamburgers and those embarrassing emails promising a bodily extension to rival Long Dong Silver. Clamp two Big Macs together and do you get a superburger - or just twice the grease? The proposed Carlton-Granada merger is touted as a union which will create an ITV "super channel". To the jaundiced eye, it's two drowning men clutching each other in the desperate hope that one of them has a lifesaving medal.

Last week, the Guardian reported that a proposed merger of University College London and Imperial College would create a London "super university". Not just the biggest in the UK, but world-class. Will it?

British universities have endured an interminable financial winter - ever since Keith Joseph's regime of cut and freeze in the 1980s set out to return higher education to the austerities of the medieval monastery. Poor, we were told, was beautiful. Be like Mother Teresa.

The Tories got what they wanted. They brought the troublemaking (and inherently "red") universities to heel. Cut and freeze was followed by the indignities of the inspectorial regime. Stand by your beds, dons, for the minister's triennial research assessment exercise (RAE) inspection.

Whipped curs can't be world beaters. British universities, once zanily wonderful places of intellectual freedom and excellence, became - admit it - dull.

The proposed super university - let's brand it YUK (Yale/UK) - can be seen as a takeover, a marriage of convenience, an amalgamation, refederation, rationalisation. It is, in fact, none of those things. To understand what is proposed one must look at the proposers.

One of the reforms imposed on universities during the past 20 years has been a layer of presidential management, recruited not from within the system but from industry. These new recruits are not rectors, provosts or vice-chancellors - with all the baggage those antique titles carry - but CEOs. They looked at British universities and saw the 19th century.

The current CEO of UCL is Sir Derek Roberts, who came into the university world, if you follow my alphabet soup, from GEC (before the Marconi debacle). The CEO of Imperial is Sir Richard Sykes, who came in from running Glaxo-Smith-Kline. This new blood would, it was expected, make universities more efficient. The classes would run on time. Research would roll out like robot-engineered Japanese cars. What was not expected was that these smart people would make over universities in their own image: which is exactly what Sykes and Roberts (long-time friends) are proposing.

They start from the frank perception that their institutions are on the brink of becoming second rate (something that career academics find hard to concede). Bluntly: London is in third place to Oxbridge and Oxbridge is in 10th place to, say, Yale-US. These, my academic friends, are facts. Face them.

Next, how to buck this trend? Merger, acquisition and consolidation of quality in new, dynamic formations, of course. Moves which are second nature to businessmen and anathema to dons (YUK? Yuk!).

On Newsnight last week, the higher education minister, Margaret Hodge, slavered at the prospect of a metropolitan super university. The government intends to mass produce undergraduates and will need big academic factories. But that is not what YUK will be (although its through-put of student units will be substantially enhanced). The super university will be strong enough to demand from the government the next stage of reform. Unfettered right to charge economic fees, to fatten its endowment and (happy day!) pay academics international market rates.

Dons have good minds but can be small-minded. The proposed merger (which will require an act of parliament) may not come off. There is nervousness on the campus. Wrangling and committee sabotage will impede progress between now and mid-December (D-day for YUK).

But how, if not by supersizing, will British universities reclaim their pole position in the world? It could work. Whatever else, it won't be dull - and who the hell would ever buy a small burger?

