M'lud, meet Charlie, my grandson

Tory peers say gay couples make bad parents. Shame on them

Peter Preston
Monday October 21, 2002
The Guardian

The house is a redbrick three-up, three-down in south Manchester. A quiet and ordinary street full of ordinary and quiet people. Except that, upstairs, there's a baby stirring in his sleep. Charlie is my new grandson; and the House of Lords is 200 miles away down the M6.

Which is maybe just as well. Charlie (at almost six months) hasn't heard about the Nasty party and the Nice party. He doesn't know that the Conservatives used to be nasty and are trying to be nice. He couldn't tell his Earl Howe from his Baroness O' Cathain (or, indeed, from a pot of sieved carrot). But one day he'll know that these distant pontificators - and their heirs and successors - are talking about him. One day he'll feel the heat.

That heat was on last week in ermine land as Earl Howe set out to gut the adoption bill MPs had passed his way. Adoption by unmarried or lesbian or gay partners? Not here, in the other place, m'lud.

"Eighty-three per cent of cohabitations break up within 10 years," observed the noble omniscience. "The average length of a cohabiting relationship is two years." And, in full statistical flow, "I defy any social worker, however experienced, to identify unfailingly couples of the same sex who are likely to remain together in a stable and permanent relationship ... The average length of a so-called closed gay relationship is 21 months. 'Closed' in this sense means that sexual fidelity has been maintained for the past month".

Quite so, said the baroness. "An assessment of primary school children in Australia shows that scores in language skills and mathematics for the children of homosexual couples are 29% and 30% lower respectively than for those with married parents."

Absolutely, said Earl Russell. "I find it quite impossible to believe that a child who has two mothers or two fathers will not be regarded as a bit of a freak at school. It's well known that children who go from local authority homes already suffer stigma. Should we add to that by creating the stigma of having two parents of the same sex?" Russell cited an "interesting" letter from a South Woodford clinical psychologist who didn't want "gay rights put before the legitimate best interests of children".

And so on and so forth, bishop succeeding bishop, the pieties of family life spilling like Rice Krispies from a full packet, until their lordships passed the Howe amendments and picked another high-profile fight with the Commons (self-appointed cheerleader: the Daily Mail).

Lord Alli, when he spoke, confessed himself "ashamed of the way in which this debate has been conducted". "Ashamed," in context, seems mild. For these arguments are always subliminally conducted in terms of "them" and "us". They are the deviants over there, those barely tolerated floaters on the peripheries of society. We are quite different. We are the bearers of the sacred cup, the upholders of marriage and all normality.

Okay. I'm one of the happy, lucky "we" party: But what has marriage to do with this? Two signatures on a piece of paper: two oaths that have lasted decades with the two people who gave them.

Tory peers have no concept of the new patterns of society. Down this ordinary street there is a kid adopted by a supposedly single lesbian - as the law allows - which gives her long-term, caring partner no rights.

And there's Charlie upstairs. I've written about my lesbian daughter a couple of times over the years, because she has taught me many things and hopes I can pass them on to a few others. Charlie isn't adopted. My daughter's partner gave birth to him; he has two mothers and a gay father. He is the child of a bonding that has endured for six years. In a world of unwanted children - 5,000 of them looking for an adoptive parent to rescue them from institutional care - he was wanted utterly; and is tended now with devotion.

Who on earth can say what will last or won't last? We all live on the edge of oblivion. But it seems to me, very close to the edge, that what matters most - all of the time - is love and commitment; is people. Of course Charlie may not have it easy. But he will be loved - and my daughter has sealed that with a legal commitment, with parental responsibility granted in court.

How can we talk about all this as though it were some facile, heedless process? There is nothing easy about lesbians or gay men choosing to have a child. On the contrary. And, beyond that, the business of adoption is more daunting still.

Do you remember Matt Engel's brilliant, angry articles for the Guardian a few years ago about the mountain of forms and interrogations he and his wife encountered when they wanted to adopt a baby from abroad? Don't think it's any easier back home. There is (saving South Woodford's blushes) no right, gay or otherwise, to adopt. There is only an entitlement to jump through hoops and hope authority will smile on you. Nothing undertaken lightly, importunately. Nothing of whim or fashion.

In logic and fact, of course, there are no statistics - no British statistics - for what happens to the adopted children of unmarried or same sex couples. Since there are no such adoptions, there are equally no progress charts. If you want to argue from abroad - from Sweden, Holland, Denmark - then that's both possible and positive.

But stick with people, not percentages. Stick with what people do, the way they are, the way they relate and care: not with the narrow guardians of prescribed propriety. I'm sick of the nastiness of "them" and "us". I'm sick of hand-me-down morality and brace-us-up legislation. I'm standing by Charlie's cot as he stirs.


