

Faultless Ferrari have redefined excellence

Maurice Hamilton says the Prancing Horse deserves praise, not censure

Sunday October 20, 2002
The Observer

Michael Schumacher is assured of a more generous reception than of late when he visits Ferrari's heartland this afternoon to become the focus of celebrations at Misano. The Italian circuit will feature nothing but Ferrari racing cars, Schumacher's championship-winning F2002 rightly being regarded as the best of the genre after redefining the meaning of excellence.

It could hardly be otherwise when Schumacher's eleventh victory of the season in Japan last Sunday ensured that he had been on the podium at the end of all 17 races. By these extraordinary standards third place in Malaysia, Schumacher's lowest finish, was a bad day at the office. For 15 of the 22 drivers taking part this season, simply reaching the rostrum just once would have been a major result.

Schumacher will be accompanied today by Rubens Barrichello, a partnership that won 15 times, leaving Ralf Schumacher and David Coulthard to collect a victory apiece for Williams-BMW and McLaren-Mercedes respectively.

Ferrari's almost complete domination earned the Italian team 221 points, an astonishing figure that matches exactly the total achieved by the remaining 10 teams put together. It also sparked the semi-hysterical view that something needs to be done about one competitor achieving near-perfection.

Ferrari should be flattered by the simplistic notion that only a weight penalty based on championship points is likely to stop the red cars in 2003. Jean Todt probably didn't see it that way when the team's sporting director came under verbal attack last weekend; rivals blamed the decline in television viewing figures on Todt's refusal to allow his drivers to race among themselves. Certainly, it would have avoided the nonsense of Barrichello being ordered to give up a convincing win in Austria and Schumacher bungling a staged finish at Indianapolis. But the truth that critics find difficult to accept is that, given a free rein, Schumacher would have won just as many races, albeit without the tedium of the cruise to the finish that team orders allow.

Barrichello 'won' four races but the computer shows that Schumacher backed off just enough to remove his threat in two of them. Without wishing to denigrate Barrichello's maturity and speed, it has to be said that his performances have been a measure of the car as well as the man. Had this year's Ferrari been as difficult as the team's best efforts three or four seasons ago, Schumacher's innate skill would have highlighted the difference in talent. For 2002, however, Barrichello had a forgiving car that increased his confidence while destroying that of his rivals.

Ferrari started out with last year's model and raised hopes of a close-fought season when Schumacher could not match a one-two for Williams-BMW at the second race in Malaysia. Patrick Head, technical director at Williams, summed up the false dawn. 'Ferrari produced one of their new cars for Schumacher at the next race in Brazil,' said Head. 'We finished a fraction behind it, but not enough to make us say, "That car is going to be trouble." Then, at the next race at Imola, it hit us when Ferrari finished one-two. We had to admit that we really hadn't done enough with our car. I think we could have competed with last year's Ferrari very readily on reliability and on speed but the new Ferrari was much better than we could have imagined. It stunned everyone in the pit lane.'

That included McLaren-Mercedes, who gambled by joining Williams on Michelin tyres, leaving Ferrari as the leading team on Bridgestone. McLaren's was a crucial decision - in Ferrari's favour. Whereas Michelin had to produce a compromise between the differing needs of McLaren and Williams, the Bridgestone tyres were tailor-made thanks to Ferrari having a test team devoted entirely to tyre evaluation. On some circuits it would be worth more than a second a lap, a huge advantage in a business that usually measures technical advances in tenths of a second.

Success bred success and the Ferrari, apart from a revised engine cover, remained virtually unchanged. McLaren, Williams and the rest meanwhile engaged in wholesale alterations to aerodynamics, underbodies, suspension geometries, but to no avail.

Rather than raising their hands in horror, the sport's key players should simply raise their caps. F1 is in need of help in several areas - a severe reduction in electronic driver aids would be a good start - but not the current desperate knee-jerk reactions just because Ferrari has been demonstrably superior in the sport's core business of winning races.


