Blair condemns fire strike

Staff and agencies
Monday October 21, 2002

Downing Street today condemned firefighters' plans to stage a series of strikes over a 40% pay demand, describing the action as "wrong and dangerous".

The prime minister's official spokesman said that while the government was making careful preparations for the Army to take over fire and rescue duties during the stoppages, there would still be a risk to the public.

Mr Blair's spokesman said: "Our view is that this strike is wrong and it's dangerous and we have to accept that."

He would not be drawn on whether strikes which put lives at risk should be outlawed, or whether certain categories of public sector workers should be banned from strike action.

He repeated simply: "The Ggovernment is absolutely of the view that this strike is wrong and dangerous and as I have said already, if other unions are talking about the dangers this poses, they should be making that crystal clear to the FBU (Fire Brigades Union)."

Britain's biggest rail union, the RMT, has warned that it might take action at the same time the firefighters are on strike. RMT leader Bob Crow said lack of fire cover could leave rail workers at risk, and promised to ballot for strike action if staff who felt they were at risk were forced to work.

Mr Blair's spokesman repeatedly refused to be drawn on whether military personnel might eventually be trained to use modern fire-fighting equipment.

But he insisted: "No matter how many committees the government sets up, no matter how much contingency planning, how many emergency measures, no matter how good a job the Army do, we do have to accept that this strike does pose a level of risk."

"You can do all you can, but you do have to accept that we won't be able to provide the same level of service and that's obviously a cause for concern."

The comments came as officials from Cobra, the Downing Street emergency committee,today met to ensure contingency plans were in place to deal with the strike.

This afternoon Tony Blair was meeting deputy prime minister John Prescott for discussions focusing on the fire fighter's dispute.

Mr Blair's spokesman stressed: "The prime minister believes that it is simply unrealistic to ask for a 40% pay increase and it would be irresponsible of the Government to accede to such a request."

He appealed again for the Fire Brigades Union to call off its action and co-operate with the independent review of terms and conditions set up by the government.

Mr Blair still hopes the Cobra committee will not have to manage the first fire service strike since 1977.

But with the union campaigning for an increase which would take its members' pay to ?30,000, there is little prospect of an early settlement.

Local government minister Nick Raynsford this morning repeated his call for the union to lift the threat of action and await the outcome of a pay review already being carried out, and which is due to report in December.

Mr Raynsford stressed that if the strikes go ahead, the Army will rely on their ageing Green Goddess vehicles, and will not be expected to attempt to use the firefighters' modern engines and equipment.

"Modern appliances are much more sophisticated and the training required to operate them would take rather longer than (is available)," said Mr Raynsford.

"The second point is that there is no guarantee that these appliances would be available. They are located within fire stations. If there are pickets around those fire stations, it would be quite wrong to expect the Army to cross picket lines."

"There are all sorts of risks of inflaming the situation, which we have no wish to do. We want an amicable resolution to this ..."

But FBU leader Andy Gilchrist told Radio 4's World at One: "Eight days from the only the second ever national fire strike, the complacency on the part of the government is quite phenomenal."

"It really is quite astonishing that the committee that met this morning is finally turning its attention to the question of safety. We have been trying absolutely to raise the issue of safety."

"We have tried our best to avoid this, but in the absence of the ability to raise and discuss the issue of pay with government or employers, we have simply got no alternative."

"All of this would be unnecessary if the government would actually turn its attention to dealing with a claim which effectively would give firefighters a take-home pay of ?8.50 an hour. This is thoroughly unnecessary. It's completely avoidable."

He rejected suggestions that the issue could be resolved through the review of the fire service proposed by the government.

"What they have given us is a very dangerous distraction, a completely non-independent review of the future of the fire service," he said.

"We have always been prepared to talk about the future organisation of the service in the future. We have an issue of pay for the responsibilities we carry out for the community now."

"Eight pounds fifty an hour, take-home, I don't think is unrealistic. It is a very reasonable and professional rate of pay for a professional job."

In an interview with The Guardian today, Mr Gilchrist warned that any walkout by firefighters might have knock-on effects on events like football matches and West End shows as well as on public transport.

But Philip French of the football Premier League told World at One: "So far, none of our clubs has indicated that they expect any problems due to the proposed firefighters' strike."

"They have been working very hard with safety authorities for this particular contingency over recent weeks."

And Emma de Souza of the Society of West End Theatres told the programme: "Our understanding is that none of our theatres will have to close during the fire strike."

Mr Gilchrist denied he was scare-mongering: "What we have been doing through the trade union movement and directly with employers' organisations is saying 'Ensure that the people coming to work in your premises and facilities are adequately safely looked after'".

"If people have got in place proper effective safety measures, then naturally we are pleased about that, but it is quite clear that the UK fire service ordinarily is playing a vital role in sustaining what we would understand as normal society."

Mr Orde, who attended this morning's Cobra meeting said that it had discussed "if there was a state of preparedness in terms of the military operation, the police assistance and what small assistance senior fire officers like myself are able to give in terms of advice".

He added: "The answer to that is yes. Regrettably, this will be necessary if a strike occurs, but the plans are in place to provide a very minimal public safety net."

"That's all it is. It can't replace the day-to-day fire brigade."

The meeting did not discuss whether picket lines might be crossed in order to use fire brigade equipment, he said.


---
