

How Blair tried to sell jets and peace to India

Ewen MacAskill and Luke Harding in New Delhi
Monday October 21, 2002
The Guardian

Tony Blair personally lobbied the Indian prime minister, Atal Bihari Vajpayee, to buy British Hawk jets during a recent Chequers meeting despite the continuing crisis with Pakistan over Kashmir.

Mr Blair's sales pitch at his country retreat comes at a time when India and Pakistan have hundreds of thousands of troops facing each other in the divided Himalayan region.

The prime minister, during informal talks last Saturday, urged Mr Vajpayee to work to reduce tension with Pakistan. But the Guardian has learned that Mr Blair combined this plea for peace with a sales pitch on behalf of Britain's biggest defence manufacturer, BAE Systems.

Mr Blair and other British ministers have been energetic in pursuit of the billion-pound Hawk order in the past but the disclosure of the Chequers pitch at such a sensitive time will create unease in sections of the Labour party.

Although both India and Pakistan last week announced partial troop withdrawals along the border, they both left their forces in Kashmir intact. The Foreign Office says the situation remains volatile.

Ministers and Labour back-benchers, already unhappy at the close links between the defence industry and the government, will question why Mr Blair used part of a valuable hour-long meeting with Mr Vajpayee to press the case for BAE Systems.

The defence order, on which a decision by India is expected soon, has been under negotiation for more than a decade. It comprises between 40 and 60 Hawks plus training programmes and spare parts.

Foreign Office officials last night confirmed that the prime minister had raised the Hawk deal. "We remain hopeful. It is the only training aircraft that fits India's needs," a spokesman said.

Other officials insisted that there was nothing wrong with the government promoting legitimate arms sales to democratic countries such as India and that the Hawk jets did not kill people, merely taught pilots how to fly safely. Although the Hawk is designed for training, it can easily be converted - and has been by Indonesia - for combat.

A Downing Street statement after the Chequers meeting made no mention of the sales pitch, only of Mr Blair's plea to Mr Vajpayee to negotiate with Pakistan.

Rows over arms sales have dogged Mr Blair's government, which committed itself in 1997 to pursue an "ethical" foreign policy. The policy was shelved last summer when the then foreign secretary, Robin Cook, architect of the policy and a campaigner for stricter controls over sales, was demoted.

His replacement, Jack Straw, though issuing an apocalyptic warning this year that Kashmir could result in nuclear conflagration, has supported Mr Blair and the defence secretary, Geoff Hoon, in pursuit of arms sales.

Mr Vajpayee on Wednesday ordered a partial pullback of Indian forces along parts of the India-Pakistan border, and Pakistan promised on Thursday to reciprocate. Both sides pointedly refused to reduce forces along the Kashmir border.

There is no sign of any diplomatic melting between New Delhi and Islamabad. India's perennial complaint is that Pakistan covertly supports Islamist militants - last week, its defence minister, George Fernandes, ruled out any talks with Islamabad. Pakistan had to end "terrorism" first, he said.

Mr Vajpayee told Mr Blair at Chequers he remained deeply suspicious of the Pakistan president, General Pervez Musharraf, not least because Islamist parties had done well in the Pakistani election last week.

The Foreign Office remains worried that a single bombing or similar outrage by Pakistan-backed insurgents will tip the two sides back into a confrontation. Indian newspapers have speculated that the Indian government is considering buying an alternative to the Hawk. Indian officials recently examined the Czech L159 and have also looked at the Russian MiG-AT, which at about $15.5m is at least $5m cheaper than the Hawk.

Last year India's defence minister, Yogendra Narian, privately told a meeting of Indian editors that his government had "regrettably" abandoned the British jet. Other Indian officials indicated that they had adopted a strategy of "interminably postponing" a final signing.

Defence sources have suggested the Indian side was unhappy that the Hawk had been sold to South Africa and Canada for about $16.5m - $4m less than the price offered to New Delhi.

BAE insisted the Indian Hawks were "qualitatively better". But the argument has not been resolved, despite the fact that two-thirds of the Hawks would be built in India by the state-run Hindustan Aeronautics company.

---
