
Secret midnight cremation for Hindley.
Tony Thompson, crime correspondent.
Sunday    November  17, 2002.
The Observer. .

Myra Hindley is likely to be cremated in a secret midnight service to avoid the attentions of the media and an angry public still horrified by her crimes.
Home Office officials have spent the weekend in meetings with representatives of two police forces, the prison service and council officers in a bid to finalise plans for the funeral of one of British crime's most reviled figures. 
Hindley's body remains under heavy police guard in the mortuary of West Suffolk Hospital and will not be moved until the last minute. A Cambridgeshire police spokesperson said: 'While details have not been finalised, it is expected that Myra Hindley will be cremated at Cambridge City Crematorium. The crematorium is next to the A14 and the police operation has been planned to minimise disruption and ensure the safety of road-users.' 
Suffolk Police had initially approached the West Suffolk Crematorium near Bury St Edmunds last year with a view to cremating Hindley's body there. This plan was abandoned when staff allegedly refused to allow such a service to take place. Staff at the Cambridge crematorium were also deeply unhappy about taking on the ceremony but agreed if certain conditions were met. John Roebuck of Cambridge City Council, which manages the crematorium, said the decision had been made on humanitarian grounds: 'Everybody has the right to a proper funeral and in the case of Myra Hindley it has got to happen somewhere.' 
Before an operation for a brain aneurysm two years ago, Hindley drew up plans for her own funeral. She was understood to have given orders to her lawyers that she was not to be kept alive artificially if she lapsed into a coma. She also ordered that none of her organs should be offered for transplant if she died and gave instructions that her body should be cremated and her ashes scattered at a secret location. Just 12 people had been invited to attend the service including her mother, niece and brother-in-law. Others included Hindley's long-time solicitor Andrew McCooey, close friend Trish Forrester and her former lover, criminologist Nina Wilde. 
Although Hindley's own plans are still in place, police sources say they may have to be revised amid concerns over the cost of a mammoth security operation and public safety. 'There will be no big send-off,' said one officer. 'Feelings about her still run very high so all arrangements have to be carefully worked out. To leave it all to the very last minute would be a logistical nightmare. We want to ensure the whole thing doesn't turn into an attraction for ghouls. We will probably end up doing it in the middle of the night.' 
Hindley died after being re-admitted to hospital on Tuesday. Earlier this month she had suffered a suspected heart attack. The chain smoker had experienced ill health for much of her 36 years behind bars, suffering from angina, suspected strokes and osteoporosis. 
Throughout much of her long incarceration, Hindley had clung to the hope that she might one day win her freedom. During Hindley's trial in 1966 the judge said she had 'a possibility of rehabilitation and redemption' but, despite her reverting to the Catholicism of her early childhood, many believe her repentance was simply a ploy to win early release. 
Former inmate Mark Leech, the editor of the Prisons Handbook, spent three hours with Hindley in her cell at Durham jail five years ago and believes it was right that she died in prison. 'She invited me to see her because she wanted me to change my views. I came away not with an alternative opinion but with an entrenched one. She struck me as a very emotionless, very cold person - perhaps that's inevitable after 30-odd years in jail. But she was very adept at telling you what she thought you wanted to hear, if she thought it would bring her closer to release.'

---
