Three held over 'poison gas' bomb plot on Tube.
Britain under threat.
Joanna Walters, Gaby Hinsliff and Robin McKie.
Sunday    November  17, 2002.
The Observer. .


Police last night revealed they had arrested three men over an alleged plot to release cyanide gas on the London Underground in a terrorist 'spectacular' to rival the September 11 strikes.
The three were last night in custody after being charged in connection with planning the alleged attack. British intelligence reportedly infiltrated the group six months ago.
The men were of Tunisian or Moroccan background and were members of a gang allegedly linked to Osama bin Laden's al Qaeda network. 
Police sources said Rabah Chekat-Bais, 21, Rabah Kadris, in his mid-30s, and Karim Kadouri, 33, all of no fixed abode, have been charged under the Terrorism Act 2000. 
They are expected to appear in court in London tomorrow.
Police sources last night disclosed that the arrests took place two weeks ago after a series of raids on homes in north London. 
Originally, six men were held, but three were later released without charge. The arrests were not disclosed at the time for fear of spreading public panic. 
The men were held ahead of warnings by Prime Minister Tony Blair and Home Secretary David Blunkett that Britain had become a target for attacks by fanatics linked to bin Laden's terror network. 
Blair, who had been told of the alleged Tube plot, used a speech last Monday to warn Britons to be on their guard, adding: 'This is a new type of war, fought in a different way by different means.' The news of the arrests will inevitably prompt questions over whether Londoners should have been warned of the possibility of an attack on the Tube. 
The Home Office, however, insisted last night that the statement was simply issued to coincide with a visit by the US homeland security adviser, Tom Ridge. 
'If we thought it was necessary to give the public a specific warning about a venue we would have,' said a Home Office source. 
Security officials believe the gang intended to release some form of poison gas, possibly cyanide, on the Tube network during the morning rush hour. The system is crowded with up to 3 million people a day. 
After putting the gang under surveillance up to six months ago, MI5, the British intelligence service, reportedly believed the group were acting on instructions from an al- Qaeda commander based in Europe. 
Scotland Yard's anti-terrorist branch raided several addresses in north London, being used as drop-in centres for Algerian, Moroccan and Tunisian immigrants. Police are understood to have taken away items after searches. 
Sources confirmed that no chemicals had been found during the raids.

---
