

Fletcher blames collapse on injuries
Paul Kelso at the Adelaide Oval
Saturday  November  23, 2002
The Guardian
As the queue of ailing cricketers outside the England physio's door has lengthened on this Ashes tour the management's bullishness on the subject has been increasingly hard to maintain.
At the end of a withering second day in Adelaide, and after Ashley Giles' admission that he is unlikely to play a significant part in the remainder of the series, they stopped trying. 
"What we have to have is continuity and we can't hide from the fact that the injuries are really hurting us," said the coach Duncan Fletcher. 
He was reflecting on a day that began with Michael Vaughan having his shoulder x-rayed as England's last six first-innings wickets were falling for just 47, and ended with Australia having closed to within 95 runs of their first innings of 342. 
Vaughan's injury, inflicted by a Jason Gillespie bouncer during his first-day 177, showed on the second morning and his inability to raise his arm above shoulder height prevented him taking the field. The x-rays revealed that the damage was restricted to bruising but, given that John Crawley was kept out of this match with a bruised hip, there was little comfort in that diagnosis. 
Crawley is also in doubt for the Waca Test, which starts in Perth next Friday, and England may consider sending for further back-up. 
"Crawley is struggling with his slight muscle tear and he is not making much progress," Fletcher said. 
Explaining the collapse that saw his side cede the initiative to Australia in familiar fashion, Fletcher felt injuries further down the batting order, specifically to Ashley Giles (broken wrist) and Andrew Flintoff (hernia), were to blame. 
"When you have got a young and inexperienced line-up with guys like [Richard] Dawson batting at No8 there's a lot of pressure on them to perform. In the past, when we have had Flintoff batting at seven, White at eight and then Giles we have looked a lot more solid and we showed in the summer we can build good totals," he said. 
"When you have three or four new faces in the side whom you have to help gain experience, it is difficult to continue building the momentum we are looking for. It is frustrating because we played good cricket on the first day and we would have hoped to get up into the 400s. We were in a good position and we let it slip." 
There is no doubt that injuries have lengthened England's tail since the summer but Indian and Sri Lankan attacks also did not boast fast bowlers of Jason Gillespie's calibre. 
The South Australian claimed four wickets for 10 runs in a devastating 6.5-over spell on the second morning, including the crucial wickets of Mark Butcher and Craig White. 
"I thought I bowled reasonably well on the first day but I probably wasn't as patient as I was on the second day," Gillespie said. "They are all good quality players but I think the plans we have got for them are pretty much spot on, and it's just a matter of executing them. It's not rocket science; we try to bowl at the top of off-stump, bowl dot balls and dry the batsmen up a bit." 
With an attack containing Shane Warne and Glenn McGrath in addition to Gillespie, Australia have the personnel to put such plans into action. England, as Fletcher conceded, do not. 
Once again Andrew Caddick, who conceded 61 runs from 10 overs, and Matthew Hoggard were profligate with the new ball as Matthew Hayden and Justin Langer posted another century opening stand at their regulation rate of five an over. 
The coach saw some hope in the form of Dawson and Steve Harmison, who both had edges off Damien Martyn missed by Alec Stewart. 
Given England's injury problems, they could have plenty more opportunities to impress the coach further.
