This is a clash between the middle ages and modernity.

Religious fundamentalism is the rallying cry of the disenfranchised.

Polly Toynbee.
Wednesday November 20, 2002.
The Guardian. .

The spectre of sarin gas, cyanide and anthrax hangs over the London underground this week. This horror, or something like it, is now "a when not an if", according to the head of the Metropolitan police and various ministers. "The threat level to the UK is very high," say the experts reading the al-Qaida omens. It is hard for the ordinary citizen to know what to do with this information, but inside the calm exterior of tube riders, the horrified imagination roams wild.

If/when a Bali or a twin towers happens here, what will it do to the country? Usually countries under attack rally to their leaders, though this time there may be a strong undertow of opinion that wonders if Britain's closeness to the US brought this down upon us needlessly. Whether an attack on Britain will make the people more or less gung-ho for war in Iraq is hard to judge. The enormity of what we are being warned about makes predictions impossible.

One thing is certain, passions would run high and British Muslims will be afraid of retaliation. It will be temptingly easy for people to fall in with the idea that we are engaged in a "clash of civilisations" if Islam at its most elemental rears up and strikes us. The distinctions between moderate believers and mad fanatics will blur. 

The popular idea of a clash of civilisations is dangerous and likely to lead to the wrong solutions. But whatever we in the west think, it is what al-Qaida believe and act on. They eat, sleep and breathe a world where the faithful take their jihad to the infidel with a force that is incomprehensible to most. 
So we try to make sense of it through things we do understand - history, sociology, geopolitics or psychology. Yet still we remain dumbfounded by wild fundamentalism. What kind of psychosis believes absolute and immutable laws of God were written down in the middle ages and must be followed down to every last disgusting punishment, ready to kill and to die in service to this savage God for divine reward?


Having just returned from Afghanistan, I am if anything more uncomprehending about the nature of an extreme religious belief that inflicts such suffering. The Taliban have gone but religious fanaticism is still in the air with its hatred of women as its most sacred article of faith, turning upon women as a loathsome sub-species. This week in Herat, a district still under the strictest religious edicts of the warlord Ismail Khan, an epidemic of young women burning themselves alive is reported. There have been over 100 girls arriving in the Herat hospital covered in burns, most young wives or teenagers betrothed against their will who have taken to self-immolation, the only protest left to them: the clash of civilisations is always fought out over women's bodies. In Afghanistan women's rights are the main battleground that will determine if the new constitution is secular and democratic or if Sharia law prevails.



So what is the real enemy that is about to attack us? Is it really Islam or is that to make the very error the extremists most want us to make? What binds together a globalised force of some extremists from many continents is a united hatred of western values that seems to them to spring from Judeo-Christianity. The danger is that we fall for their own Ummah myth-making and start to define the west as some kind of "Christendom" in response, which it is not. The west is secular and multi-ethnic.

The trouble with the civilisation clash theory is that it implies that Islam as uniquely prone to savagery, because it was the creation of a warrior prophet who proclaimed jihad as a way or life. Too literally interpreted, his laws binding religion and state together make democracy impossible. Look at Islam's many failed states, dictatorships and corrupt religious rulers. 

The theory goes that Christians, on the other hand, fortunately had a prophet who rendered governance unto Caesar and considered the lilies of the field instead. Even better, he never wrote down any laws. But this is gross arrogance, given the history of Christianity - and of every other religion in its hot phase. It has been every bit as prone to massacre, torture, terrorism and the oppression of women. All religions - look at the Hindus in India - do monstrous things when people passionately believe them. They only turn contemplative when drained of any shred of temporal power, only safe when not interpreted literally.

The clash of civilisations here is not with Islam: it is with religion itself, a clash between modernity and the middle ages. Islam is just the emotional battle flag rallying post-colonial, disenfranchised people living under feudal governments. They seek a demented, inchoate revenge on the global winners by turning the clock back to their imagined golden age at the time of the prophet. They seek an impossible divine government whose reality under the Taliban is one of the most horrible yet devised.

How might they best be proved wrong and their fury gradually abated? Today Turkey's leader of the newly elected government, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, visits Downing Street to press his case for Turkey's admission to the EU before the Copenhagen summit next month. A ripple of fear greets the idea of 70 million Muslims joining the EU: it will dilute European identity, every Turk will take the first chance to migrate and anyway only 5 percent of Turkey falls within the European continent. Who else might want to join next - Morocco, Israel? Valery Giscard d'Estaing, president of the committee drawing up the EU's new constitution, was first to blurt out with racist overtones what many Europeans think: Turks are people of "a different culture, a different approach, a different way of life". What he meant was Islamic.

So this will be the true test of whether there is a clash of civilisations. First, can Islamic Turkey become as democratic and free as any other country? Second, if it can will Europe welcome it with open arms or prove the Muslim extremists right by declaring our own jihad and pulling up the drawbridge on some imaginary "Christendom"?

So far Turkey is only seeking a "rendezvous clause", a date to fix a date for entry. It has a long way to go before qualifying, not least on the human rights front. But it has just abolished the death penalty, passed anti-torture laws and given new rights to the Kurds, while Human Rights Watch reports "a remarkable year of human rights progress", though terrible things still happen there. The new government has to prove itself genuinely secular, free of the army and able to make peace in Cyprus. But if all that is done, how can they be refused?

Their admission may dilute EU identity for a while. But the far greater prize - the one that matters most - is the chance to prove to Islamic fanatics that Muslims are as entitled to democratic and free states as the rest of the Europe.

---
