
Something about Mariah.
Geraldine Bedell.
Sunday    November  17, 2002.
The Observer. .

What you don't realise about Mariah Carey, if you've only seen her on television, is how big she is -nearly 6ft, with breasts that look as though she's taken a football pump to them, they're so inflated and bouncy. Her hair tumbles over her shoulders and her bare, honey-coloured thighs are magnificently honed. She is Amazonian, an impressive specimen of corn-fed humanity - which makes her waif-like sense of herself as having lost out on some crucial part of growing up all the more poignant.
The past 18 months have not been good for Mariah Carey. In July 2001, after posting several rambling and plaintive messages on her website, she suffered what was officially described as a 'complete emotional breakdown' and was admitted to hospital amid rumours that she had tried to kill herself, although the cuts on her body were explained away by her publicist as 'an accident with plates'. Not long before this, she had broken up with her boyfriend of three years, South American singer Luis Miguel. Shortly afterwards - on 11 September - her movie,  Glitter was released and did dismal business at the box office. The soundtrack to the film was her first outing with Virgin, to which she had signed in the biggest recording deal in history. The album sold a mere two million copies, compared with a career average of eight million. Last February, Virgin's parent company, EMI, terminated her contract with a pay-off of $35 million. 
But now she is back, with a new single, and an album, Charmbracelet, recorded on her own label, in a joint venture with Island/Def Jam. How album and single fare will go some way towards answering the question of whether Carey is fundamentally the creation of one man, her former husband, Tommy Mottola. With her soulful five- octave voice and songwriting ability (she composes all her material) there ought to be no barrier to many more years at the top. But it remains to be seen whether she has the confidence to market herself, now that he is no longer there to do it for her. 
