
Police to act as Ministers quash hopes of fire deal.
Kamal Ahmed and Oliver Morgan.
Sunday    November  17, 2002.
The Observer. .

Police will cross picket lines and commandeer fire engines under plans being drawn up by the Government, if the firefighters' strike continues over Christmas and into the new year.
As government officials last night rubbished any suggestion of a deal after fire union leaders signalled willingness to accept a 16 per cent pay claim rather than the original 40 per cent, senior Whitehall sources said police would be drafted in under 'public order' legislation aimed at ensuring public safety. 
The development would prevent the need for Army personnel to cross strikers' picket lines, a move that government officials believe would be politically damaging.
The contingency plans reveal a sharp hardening of the Government's stance a day after Andy Gilchrist, the leader of the Fire Brigades Union (FBU), suggested that he might be willing to back down on his position that the strike would be called off only if his members received a 40 per cent rise. 
He has now suggested that a 16 per cent one-year increase could be a start for new negotiations with employers, who will meet tomorrow for last-ditch talks aimed at averting the next eight-day stoppage, set to start on Friday. 
But senior figures close to John Prescott, the Deputy Prime Minister, who is in charge of Government preparations for the strike, said the proposal from the independent pay review body for an 11 per cent pay deal over two years was the only one on the table. 
'There is no more money,' one official said. Asked if the review recommendations, under the chairmanship of Sir George Bain, were non-negotiable, the official replied 'yes'. 
He also made clear that the union would have to move much further if the next strike was to be averted. But Andy Gilchrist, the FBU leader, last night refused to budge, saying Tony Blair 'will not win this one'. 
Relations appeared to be worsening as Downing Street officials confirmed last night that the police option was being developed if 'push came to shove'. 'There is a stage at which you have to put public safety above other considerations,' the official said. 'As we said last week, we have reached that stage. We are continuing as if there will be a strike on Friday.' 
The Government is keen to have red, high-speed fire engines driven by troops operating on the streets in time for the next strike. A letter sent by Nick Raynsford, the fire services Minister, to local fire authorities last week said that officials were 'keen' to supplement the present fleet of green goddesses which can travel at only 35mph. 
Just over 100 modern vehicles, mostly used for training, have now been requisitioned   by the Government and soldiers have been training to use the basic functions such as hoses, pumps and ladders which reach much further than those on the green goddesses. 
One official said that some of the engines, which can travel at up to 80mph, would be ready for the weekend. 
The appearance of modern fire engines on the streets would be a blow to morale for firefighters. Yesterday a poll in the Times suggested that two-thirds of the public thought that they should abandon their dispute and negotiate around the 11 per cent offer. 
Local authority employers indicated that extra cash could be found for the firefighters if the union agreed to 'service changes'. The union may also be flexible over the time period of a deal. 
John Ransford, a director of the Local Government Association, confirmed that a 16 per cent figure was 'one of the things that was talked about' in June. He said: 'They [the union] are now talking about 16 per cent and they are willing to talk about modernisation of work practices. 
'That seems like a dramatic change of position and is much closer to us. If they have got proposals, the place to deal with them is in negotiation, and we will do that.' 
He said such a deal would have to be linked - and funded - through savings made by modernisation in the absence of further Government cash. 
Gilchrist, the union's general secretary, is expected to meet Prescott tomorrow to discuss public safety. Officials said Prescott would do 'anything he could' to get the employers and union leaders back to the negotiating table.
'Our determination to resolve the issue of pay only grows,' Gilchrist said. 'We will now be spending the next vital few days in seeking proper and significant increases in pay that we can talk about around the table.' 
An FBU source said the union executive may be prepared to negotiate over the phasing of a deal. Until now the FBU has demanded it be a one-year package. 
'The 16 per cent figure would be an interesting point to enter negotiations. It might not mean we settle for that - it may be 18 per cent, it may be 14 per cent, it depends.'

---
