Henry lights the fuse.
Ian Ridley at Highbury.
Sunday    November  17, 2002.
The Observer. .

Just when you think that Tottenham Hotspur might be getting there under Glenn Hoddle, that they might be closing on the serious players of the Premiership, they produce a performance like this that illustrates how big the gap really is. The clubs might be just a few miles apart but, in footballing terms, hundreds divide them.
With a display of pace and movement reminiscent of earlier in the season, Arsenal overwhelmed a sad Spurs side, who resorted to the snarling spite of the inadequate, to move to the top of the table. Thierry Henry's exhilarating first- half goal was scant division; those by Freddie Ljungberg and Sylvain Wiltord against a fading 10 men - Simon Davies having incurred two yellow cards with less than half an   hour gone - more reflective of their superiority. 
Arsenal and their fans appear to approach what is the most traditional and fevered London derby with rather less fervour these days, due to the gap that has grown between the two clubs over the past decade. What is a match against your nearest rivals when the day before you are given trips to and visits by Ajax, Roma and Valencia to anticipate? 
When the game kicks off, however, pride and passion soon kick in, and no matter the number of overseas players unable to understand what the result will mean in North London workplaces on Monday morning, it is the kick part that is operative. 
First, Dennis Bergkamp felt the full force of Dean Richards in the back of his neck, and would not last the   first half-hour. Then Sol Campbell, still detested by Tottenham fans for his move to Highbury, clattered into Jamie Redknapp, earning fierce words from the Spurs captain Teddy Sheringham as a melee developed. 
The referee Mike Riley chose not to issue any cards as some heavy tackles came in, then did show one when Simon Davies caught Ashley Cole on the ankle after the ball had gone. Four minutes later, Davies did the same to Patrick Vieira, this time mistiming a tackle, and a second yellow meant a red. Again about a dozen players squared up, Campbell and Sheringham again in each other's face. 
Fortunately amid all this, some flowing football was played, mainly by Arsenal, who began with Gilberto Silva testing Kasey Keller with a low drive. Redknapp did the same at the other end, Rami Shaaban, deputising for the injured David Seaman, clutching capably. 
Arsenal had the ball in the net after only three minutes, when Sylvain Wiltord turned home Cole's cross, but was dubiously ruled offside - replays showed him to be level - and after 33, when Henry diverted home Wiltord's flick from a low cross by Robert Pires, substituting for Bergkamp. This time the decision was correct. 
In between, though, came an effort that did count and a special one it was, too. When Steffen Freund's long throw was headed out, Henry brought the ball down some 30 yards inside his own half and set off on a run at the heart of the Spurs defence. 
Leaving Matthew Etherington - who would receive withering looks from his team-mates - Henry then feigned to shoot, wrong-footing Stephen Carr and Ledley King, before tucking a left-footed shot into right corner of Keller's goal. The celebratory run was even longer, taking him 90 yards, dangerously up towards the corner where the Spurs fans were housed. 
Spurs could rarely escape   the yoke of Arsenal's pressure - Robbie Keane misheading their only decent chance of the first half - and they were fortunate to reach the interval only a goal down. 
Tottenham emerged for the second half with new venom. Gus Poyet replaced the lightweight Etherington and his first contribution was to catch Vieira late to bring a yellow card. Spurs were continuing their tactic from last year's derby of targeting the Frenchman. Then they had four players booked, all for fouls on Vieira. Not that others escaped - though Tottenham escaped punishment by Mr Riley, who was barely coping. 
Arsenal responded with another delightful goal. Ljungberg hustled Redknapp off the ball and Wiltord seized on it to send in Henry, who   turned King and then fed Ljungberg, who had continued his run, for a tap-in. 
Spurs did have a chance when Poyet played the ball into the path of Richards, but the big centre-back's finish was weak, and Pascal Cygan was able to get back and clear. 
Arsenal added a third when Goran Bunjevcevic missed Oleg Luzhny's throw-in, allowing Pires to escape and, from his pass, Henry shot and Keller saved. Pires was in support, though, to sweep the rebound to Wiltord for another tap-in. 

---
