
"No fighter matters when set against Don and Bob".
The heavyweight courtroom clash of boxing's most powerful promoters.
Donald McRae.
Monday    November  11, 2002.
The Guardian.
The heavyweight division may be in ruins but the Fight Of The Year turned out to be a typically relentless and compelling battle between the two biggest and most powerful brawlers in boxing. In one corner stood Don King, the perennial champion and mammoth master of chaos. He had slugged it out for eight days against his most formidable and bitterest opponent, Bob Arum, whose uncanny ability to match King jibe for jibe, and lawsuit for counter-lawsuit, is evoked by his infamous catchphrase: "Yesterday I was lying, today I'm telling the truth."
"That's Bob 'Straight Outta Harvard' Arum for you," King yelped as the two promoters waited while their bruising rematch went to the jury's scorecards in a Florida courtroom last week. The Don, so smart and so ferocious that he is the only huckster alive to boast successive courtroom victories over the FBI, the IRS and the biggest insurance companies in the world, looked suddenly anxious. His plan to wrest $14m from Arum, and to secure yet more bragging rights as the canniest operator in boxing, rested on his dubious claim that, in 1998, his rival had stolen one of King's former fighters, Julio Cesar Chavez. In mitigation for being duped King argued that he had been distracted by charges of wire fraud against him in New York. 
Who really cared any more that the real heavyweight champion, Lennox Lewis, past his best and yet with few challengers, had allegedly taken a million from King and relinquished his International Boxing Federation belt so that the promoter could hustle a bogus title contest next month between the very old Evander Holyfield and the very boring Chris Byrd? Or that Lewis himself will work for King's television team as a "colour commentator" during that pay-per-yawn broadcast? 
It becomes harder than ever to feign indignation that the whole division would look, if this is at all possible, even more ludicrous after King announced his plans for a World Boxing Association championship fight between an apparent belt-holder, John "The Quiet Man" Ruiz and Roy Jones - a truly brilliant boxer but, in reality, a   super- middleweight who is probably only flirting again with the unlikely prospect of fighting even a drab heavyweight. How much did any of these fighters matter, even Lewis and Jones, when set against two snarling legends like The Don and The Bob? 
"There's not a viperous rattlesnake in the deserts of Arizona or Nevada who spits out the venom of Bob Arum," King said. "Arum is a snake. But, hell, you gotta respect the most dangerous snakes. It's just hard for Arum to accept that an ordinary black man like me can live fairly, equitably and honestly without treachery or trickeration. Arum's wanted to ruin me for years. I'm just a little bit cleverer than him." 
King, despite his diamond-studded silver crucifix and satiny Stars 'n' Stripes tie, was more measured during an impromptu press conference outside the courthouse. "I guess Arum and me are always in court suing each other. Arum is Arum. I have learned to live with Arum, not to character-assassinate him. He does a wonderful job of that himself. All I want to do is work for the betterment of the sport. Some of the things he does to me I would not do back to him." 
Arum sounded equally philosophical. "I don't think King will ever retire," Arum sighed. "Even though I hate the loud- mouthed bastard I don't want him to disappear. There's a lot of resentment towards King and that favours me. King has burned huge corporations and entire countries. He makes me look good. 
I'll tell you how King operates. He gets you on the phone when he wants something and he doesn't stop until you're exhausted. He's ready to stay on forever, yelling and screaming until he gets his way. There's no quit in King. When we co-promoted Trinidad-De la Hoya in 1999 I refused to take one call from King during the whole two months of that publicity campaign." 
Despite their mutual loathing King and Arum have jointly staged classic fights over the past 30 years - from Ali- Frazier to Duran-Leonard. "When there's money to be made," Arum says, "we can almost control the antipathy and work together. And I concede that King's the greatest salesman I've ever seen." 
Earlier this year, after Arum's private jet had   crashed and caught fire, it seemed as if the decades of animosity would finally give way to affection. After the near-fatal accident Arum told reporters: "I jumped through a wall of fire, then rolled around on the ground like they do in the movies, but there were no flames on me. I got calls from all over the world once people heard I'd survived unscathed. Even Don called me - three times. He left messages saying how happy he was that I was OK." 
King, presumably, was jubilant that he could also proceed with his $14m suit against Arum. He was, however, more downbeat when, without a split decision to stir up any controversy, the jury finally declared that a unanimous decision had been reached in Florida. "The Harvard Rattlesnake" was innocent - at least within the strictly defined remit of the charge laid against him. King, in a rare and devastating loss, would not receive a cent from Arum. 
"Justice has been done," Arum beamed. 
While King glowered in the background his attorney, Alvin Davis, sheepishly said: "I think we finished second." 
Yet, within hours of his courtroom defeat, King had organised another steamroller of a press conference to claim that "on the deliciously dangerous date with destiny that is December 14 we shall bear witness to a pugilistic masterclass between two inspirational heavyweights in Evander 'The Real Deal' Holyfield and that brilliantly elusive birdman, Chris 'Where Eagles Dare' Byrd. Even Bob Arum's gonna watch this one  ..." 
At least The Don had the grace to cackle darkly at that last lie. "Well, maybe not Arum. He'll keep away because, man, he just knows it. No one can keep me down - not even Bob Arum. He might have won this one but, next time, I'm gonna get him. I want a rematch ..."

---
