
Psychiatric diagnoses are labels that describe certain types of behaviour. They do not indicate anything about the nature or causes of the experiences. Mental health problems are a common source of distress to individuals and their families. At any one time about one in four adults experience difficulties for which they seek help outside the family. But less than one percent of the population suffers from severe mental illness. Mental health has a major impact on the ability of parents to look after children, and on their employment and levels of income. For a proportion of people, hospital admission and treatment are appropriate.


Social circumstances are very important. People from disadvantaged backgrounds, especially young men, seem at greatest risk of receiving a diagnosis of schizophrenia. However, although the risks might vary, almost anyone could have psychotic experiences in circumstances of extreme stress. The course and outcome of psychotic experiences are very different for different people. Less than a quarter of people who have distressing psychotic experiences at some time in their lives remain permanently affected by them. People have poorer outcomes if their spouses or family members are highly critical or overprotective.


Mental health and "mental illness" (and different types of mental "illness") shade into each other and are not separate categories. Ten to fifteen percent of the population have heard voices or experienced hallucinations at some point in their life. These are frequently triggered by extreme experiences such as sleep deprivation. It may be appropriate to think in terms of "stress-vulnerability" when explaining psychotic experiences. People may have greater or lesser levels of vulnerability to this type of experience, which are triggered by greater or fewer numbers of stressful events experienced.


In the main, research into genetics, brain chemistry, the physical environment and brain structure has not led to clear conclusions about physical causes. It is likely that genetics, brain chemistry, brain structure and the environment are all associated with vulnerabilities to a variety of general traits, which may in turn be related to psychotic experiences. It is clear that psychotic experiences involve brain events, and can be influenced by biological processes. It is important to remember, however that every single thought we have involves chemical changes in the brain, and this is as true for "normal" as well as "psychotic" experience.


Traditional psychiatric drugs are by far the most common form of help offered to people with psychotic experiences. They are not a "cure" but can alleviate "symptoms". They can be used for acute psychotic experiences and/or used long-term to try to prevent future problems. They do not help everyone. Two thirds of people who take medication regularly are likely to experience a recurrence of their psychotic experiences within two years. They can have serious unwanted effects ("side effects") which for some people can be worse than the original problem.


Newer drugs ("atypical antipsychotics" such as clozapine) are not necessarily any more effective, but can cause fewer adverse effects. Each individual should be able to make informed choices about which, if any, drug works best for them.


Suicide is now the most common cause of death in those under 35 years. The rate is declining, but more than 4000 people commit suicide in England every year. People who suffer from severe mental illness have a higher risk of taking their own life.

---
