 nyt960806.0315 
 A3572 
 BC-TWA-CRASH-392&amp;ADD-NYT 
 08-06 
 1004 

BC-TWA-CRASH-392&amp;ADD-NYT
INVESTIGATORS: TWA EXPLOSION DIDN'T ORIGINATE NEAR COCKPIT
(With TWA-CRASH-FAMILY)
(kd)
By DON VAN NATTA Jr.
c.1996 N.Y. Times News Service



   NEW YORK  --  After picking apart some of the wadded remains of the
cockpit of Trans World Airlines Flight 800, investigators concluded
Tuesday that the catastrophic explosion that destroyed the Boeing
747 most likely did not originate inside the cockpit or in the
electronics bay beneath it.

   They were partly persuaded by a surprising discovery found in
the ton of wreckage that had been the jet's cockpit: The circles of
glass that cover many of the cockpit dials, and even a light bulb
above a staircase that led to the plane's upper deck, had somehow
survived the crash intact.

   ``You have this mass of wreckage and yet things from that area
are relatively the way they were before the accident,'' said Robert
T. Francis, vice chairman of the National Transportation Safety
Board. ``There is no indication at this point of anything in that
area that would give cause for concern in terms of something having
initiated there.''

   A senior investigator who looked at the cockpit wreckage Tuesday
said that one of the plane's altimeters  --  instruments that show the
plane's altitude  --  was frozen with a reading of 13,100 feet.
Altimeters are mechanically driven instruments that do not depend
on electricity to work, so the finding suggests that the mechanics
continued working for several seconds after the initial explosion,
at about 13,700 feet.

   Federal investigators continued their search for the cause of
the crash Tuesday, the 20th day since Flight 800 exploded in midair
off Long Island and plunged into the Atlantic Ocean, killing all
230 people on board. On the seas and on the shore, investigators
said they made a modest amount of progress, though they still have
not determined if the plane crash was caused by a bomb, a missile
attack or a mechanical malfunction.

   At the former Grumman hangar in Calverton, investigators on
Tuesday began piecing together the fractured parts of the airplane.
They also pulled about one-third of the cockpit wreckage off the
one-ton ball of metal, essentially unwrapping it.

   James K. Kallstrom, the assistant director of the FBI's New York
office, said he had sent many agents who had been working in
Suffolk County back to their home offices, mostly in New York City.
Criminal investigators are anxious for the cause to be determined,
he said, adding: ``We are in a bit of a waiting pattern.''


NYT-08-06-96 2005EDT



