 nyt960601.0131 
 A6505 
 BC-HAZARD-PULL-COX 
 06-01 
 0543 

BC-HAZARD-PULL-COX
HISTORY BOX TO GO WITH PBP-HAZARD
c. 1996 Cox News Service



   Previous incidents involving the carrying of hazardous air
cargo:

   NOV. 3, 1973  -- 

   Heavy smoke and fumes cause a crash that kills three crewmen and
destroys a Pan Am Boeing 707. An improperly packaged container of
nitric acid burst into flames in the cargo compartment. The Clipper
160 cargo plane bound from New York's John F. Kennedy Airport to
Frankfurt, Germany, crashed during an emergency landing at Boston's
Logan Airport. After the crash, the Air Line Pilots Association
formally recommended to the Safety Board that ``all hazardous
materials be banned from interstate air transportation.''

   AUG. 19, 1980  -- 

   A cargo compartment fire spreads through a Saudi Arabian
Airlines L-1011, killing all 301 people aboard. The pilot was able
to successfully land the jet in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. But
evacuation attempts failed. Although unable to determine the cause
of the fire, the National Transportation Safety Board used the
incident to push for better methods for containing fires in cargo
holds. The FAA recommended installation of fiberglass ceiling
liners in lieu of the standard C-2 Nomex fabric liners used in
cargo compartments at the time.

   AUG. 10, 1986  -- 

   Fire consumes an American Trans Air DC-10 after passenger and
crew deplane in Chicago. A jostled oxygen generating canister  -- 
similar to the ones carried aboard ValuJet Flight 592  --  set off the
fire in the cargo hold.

   FEB. 3, 1988  -- 

   An American Airlines DC-9 makes an emergency landing in
Nashville, forcing 126 passengers and crew to evacuate after
chemicals illegally shipped from Austin start a fire in the cargo
hold. The floor in the passenger cabin melted and smoke wafted
through the cabin. The National Transportation Safety Board called
for fire detection and extinguishing equipment in Class D cargo
holds. The FAA rejected the recommendation because it would cost
more than $350 million to retrofit existing aircraft.

   FEB. 1, 1991  -- 

   Fire breaks out in the cargo hold of a DC-9 bound from Charlotte
to Greensboro, N.C. No one is injured, but an illegal cache of tear
gas, volatile liquid dichloromethane, lamp oil, witch hazel and
matches are found in the cargo compartment.

   AUG. 20, 1993  -- 

   A leaking package containing blood tainted with the HIV virus
was packed as air freight in Santa Rosa, Calif. Several cargo
loaders handled the unmarked package before someone placed it in a
clear plastic bag. An inspection revealed the package contained
human tissue and blood samples, which laboratory tests revealed
were positive for the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), which
causes AIDS.

   APRIL 6, 1994  -- 

   Mercury seeps out of a mail bag during the loading of a
McDonnell Douglas DC-9 Super 80 in Houston. The container lacked
corrosive and hazmat warning labels. The shipper appeared unaware
of proper shipping procedures, claiming he had shipped mercury in
the same manner for the past two decades without mishap. Compiled
from reports supplied by the National Transportation Safety Board,
the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the Federal
Aviation Administration.


NYT-06-01-96 1327EDT



