 nyt960514.0488 
 A5679 
 BC-CRASH-CONSUME-COX 
 05-14 
 0498 

BC-CRASH-CONSUME-COX
NERVOUS FLYERS HAS MANY PLACES TO FIND OUT INFORMATION ON AIRLINE
FLIGHTS, PLANES
EDs: With CRASH-CONTACTBOX; CRASH-MAIN.
By MITCH McKENNEY
c.1996 Cox News Service



   WEST PALM BEACH, Fla.  --  ``I'm traveling next week on a Delta
flight with an extemely fearful flier,'' begins the note posted
Saturday night in a computer forum on aviation safety.

   ``The ticket agent told me it was an MD-88 and I was hoping
someone here could provide us with a little info about exactly what
kind of aircraft that is and what its track record has been.''

   Relax, about two dozen people have since told the writer: the
planes have an outstanding safety record.

   ``Tell your friend to expect Delta to provide her with a safe
and on-time journey,'' one wrote.

   Places like CompuServe's Aviation Safety Interest Group, a
longtime gathering point for pilots and aviation buffs  --  and
several sites on the Internet  --  can arm you with a lot of
information about airplane models, crash records and other data.

   But can you find out if the plane you're catching tomorrow has
had a lot of maintenance problems? Or whether it's one of the
models for which the government, eager to prevent smoky fires, has
started requiring new cockpit wiring?

   A phone call to the airline can get you the model scheduled for
your flight and perhaps the age of the plane, but not much else.

   Even if you can extract the plane's tail number from a customer
service agent, searching aviation databases ``is not for someone
who doesn't have a lot of patience,'' said Mike Overly (CQ) ,
research director for the Aviation Safety Institute in Columbus,
Ohio.

   And once you had the records and are reassured your plane's in
fine shape, you could find the airline had to make a substitution.

   A USAir spokesman said a daily flight from West Palm Beach to
Charlotte, for example, could get any of the airline's 34 757s,
depending on weather delays, scheduled maintenance and other
factors.

   ``The airline usually will fly the same type of plane,'' said
Steve Loucks, spokesman for the American Society of Travel Agents.
``But there's no real way to pinpoint which piece of aircraft
you'll be traveling on.''

   If you're seeking information on the model, as the woman curious
about the MD-88 was, several sites on the World Wide Web can help.

   The Federal Aviation Administration is a good starting point,
with the FAA's weekly summary of airport and airline incidents,
known as service difficulty reports, and equipment notices called
airworthiness directives.

   And Internet news groups and aviation forums such as
CompuServe's can offer useful advice, such as thinking of
turbulence ``like the wake from a boat'' and comparing changes in
engine pitch with the sounds a Greyhound bus moter makes while
climbing and descending hills.

   (Story Filed By The Palm Beach Post, West Palm Beach, Fla.)


NYT-05-14-96 2141EDT



