 nyt960823.0609 
 A1611 
 BC-TWA-CRASH-TERRORISTS- 
 08-23 
 1711 

BC-TWA-CRASH-TERRORISTS-525&amp;ADD-NYT
(ATTN: N.Y., Va., Fla., R.I., Hawaii, Brazil, Iran., Israel, Japan,
Libya, Germany, U.K., Egypt, Lebanon, Italy, Greece, Germany)
AUTHORITIES EYE TERRORISTS WHO TARGET PLANES
(lh)
By DOUGLAS FRANTZ
c.1996 N.Y. Times News Service



   NEW YORK  --  In June, a few weeks before the crash of Trans World
Airlines Flight 800 off Long Island, leaders of several Middle
Eastern terrorist organizations backed by the Iranian government
met in Teheran, Iran, to plan terrorist acts, intelligence
officials said Friday.

   Among them was the Popular Front for the Liberation of
Palestine-General Command, an organization that has been linked to
airplane bombings in the past, according to the officials. And its
leader, Ahmed Jabril, came to the meeting to ask for permission to
carry out terrorist attacks against American interests, one
intelligence official said.

   The organizations that attended the meeting, and the session
itself, are among a number of avenues that federal investigators
are following in their inquiry into the crash of the TWA jet,
according to the officials, who spoke on condition of anonymity.

   Although the FBI has not declared that the plane crashed as the
result of a criminal act, the FBI crime lab has found traces of
PETN, a component of plastic explosives, on a piece of wreckage
from the cabin of the plane. Investigators noted that PETN was a
component of bombs used in past terrorist bombings of airplanes.

   The intelligence officials cautioned that they had no evidence
linking the June meeting in Teheran to the crash on July 17. They
note that Iran is not known to have targeted Americans in recent
years and that the time span between the meeting and the crash may
have been too short to execute a complex operation.

   But a senior federal investigator working on the TWA case said
investigators were interested in learning more about the meeting.
At the same time, though, investigators say they are examining many
other individuals and organizations in their inquiry.

   If Flight 800 is proved to have been brought down by a bomb, as
most investigators strongly believe, it remains possible that no
foreign terrorists were involved. The crash could have been the
result of a domestic criminal act. Still, if the TWA crash is
eventually blamed on a terrorist attack, the investigators said
Jabril and the others who were in Teheran would be high on a short
list of suspects.

   Other terrorist groups identified as present at the Teheran
meeting included leaders of the Lebanese-based Hezbollah, which has
been linked to the 1983 bomb blast in Beirut that killed 241 U.S.
Marines, and the Egyptian branch of Islamic Jihad, which is loyal
to Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman. He was convicted of plotting to blow up
the United Nations, and his followers were convicted of the bomb
attack on the World Trade Center.

   In recent years, a small number of terrorist organizations have
demonstrated the capability of bombing an airplane. While
investigators have not ruled out the possibility of a previously
unknown group, investigators say evidence amassed about the bombs
and methods used in previous attacks may yield important clues in
the investigation of Flight 800.

   ``If it was a bomb, determining the kind of bomb and the way it
got on the plane will narrow down the universe of suspects,'' said
Vincent Cannistraro, a private security consultant and former chief
of counterterrorism at the Central Intelligence Agency.


NYT-08-23-96 2135EDT



