 nyt960725.0945 
 A9569 
 BC-TWA-CRASH-ATHENS-500&amp; 
 07-25 
 0722 

BC-TWA-CRASH-ATHENS-500&amp;ADD-NYT
(ATTN: N.Y., Greece)
SECURITY IN ATHENS BETTER THAN AT JFK, EXPERTS SAYS
(lh)
By PAM BELLUCK
c.1996 N.Y. Times News Service



   Immediately after the crash of TWA Flight 800 on July 17,
speculation focused on the possibility that the plane had been
sabotaged at its previous stop before New York, the airport in
Athens, Greece.

   The airport has had a reputation for lax security since 1985,
when terrorists hijacked TWA Flight 847 departing from Athens and
tortured and killed a U.S. Navy diver on board. In March, the
Federal Aviation Administration issued a travel warning for the
airport, but lifted it in May after a new training program for
airport police began.

   Airline and airport staffs based in Athens and New York, along
with aviation security experts, say that Hellenikon International
Airport in Athens has more security precautions in effect than
Kennedy International Airport. In fact, these experts say, European
airports have gone much further toward combating the threat of
explosives on airplanes than airports in the United States.

   ``Our focus has been anti-hijacking, as opposed to
anti-sabotage,'' said Billie Vincent, a former director of security
with the FAA and now a private airline security consultant. ``The
threat changed, but we did not change our focus.''

   For example, before the plane left Athens on the morning of July
17 as Flight 881 to New York, a security firm that is a subsidiary
of TWA searched for bombs, contraband or suspicious items in hidden
parts of the aircraft, like the panels that line the luggage
compartment and the crevices underneath the toilet or other
bathroom fixtures.

   Such a security sweep was not done when the plane landed at
Kennedy Airport or before it took off for Paris. Other airlines,
including United, Avianca and Air Jamaica, which stop along several
known drug smuggling routes, hire private security companies to
conduct such sweeps before their planes take off from Kennedy. Many
of the companies also monitor the people who clean the airplane
when it is on the ground, to make sure they do not plant drugs on
the aircraft. TWA, which does not travel to countries that are on
prominent drug routes, does not.

   Takis Tassopoulos, director of the Aviation Security Division in
Athens, said Greek police dog units inspect each flight leaving for
New York.

   Also in Athens, hand luggage is X-rayed twice, when passengers
enter the terminal and just before they get on the plane, reducing
the possibility that someone could place an explosive device in a
passenger's carry-on luggage. At Kennedy Airport, hand luggage is
X-rayed only upon entering the terminal, which is supposed to be
sealed off from anyone who is not a passenger or an employee.

   Air cargo is also more strictly scrutinized in Athens, said a
representative of a U.S. air carrier there who insisted on
anonymity.

   ``We secure all our cargo,'' said the official, who said most
American carriers in Greece have their own cargo X-ray machines.
``I can't tell you we X-ray everything. But there are systems in
place so everything is secured. Cargo is often manually searched.''



NYT-07-25-96 2329EDT



