 nyt960605.0714 
 A1559 
 BC-NAVY-JOHNSON-ART-500&amp; 
 06-05 
 0989 

BC-NAVY-JOHNSON-ART-500&amp;ADD-NYT
LOW-KEY OFFICER IN HIGH-STRESS JOB: ADM. JAY L. JOHNSON
(ART ADV: Photo of Adm. Johnson has been sent to NYT photo clients.
Non-subscribers can make individual purchase by calling
212-556-4204 or 1927.)
(kd)
By ERIC SCHMITT
c.1996 N.Y. Times News Service



   WASHINGTON  --  Adm. Jay L. Johnson, one of the fastest-rising
stars in the Navy, faces the most daunting challenge of his 28-year
career in taking command of a service wracked by tragedy and
turmoil.

   President Clinton, calling this a ``crucial time'' in the Navy's
history, Wednesday tapped Johnson to succeed his mentor, Adm.
Jeremy Boorda, who committed suicide three weeks ago.

   Colleagues describe Johnson, who became 50 on Wednesday, as a
smart, decisive and low-key officer who as the new Chief of Naval
Operations would move quickly to reassure a Navy badly shaken by
the death of his popular predecessor. Johnson, a 1968 graduate of
the U.S. Naval Academy, has been the vice chief of naval operations
since April 1.

   ``Jay is a very steady, solid force who gives the impression of
being unflappable,'' said Stanley R. Arthur, a retired admiral who
commanded Navy forces in the Persian Gulf war. ``He'll present a
soothing image. You won't see a lot of flash and dash from him.''

   There is little doubt about the admiral's combat credentials. A
fighter pilot with 150 combat missions during the Vietnam War,
Johnson won praise as head of the Second Fleet during the U.S.
intervention in Haiti in 1994, helping to coordinate the flying of
Army helicopters off a Navy aircraft carrier.

   A larger question is whether Johnson can overcome a relative
lack of experience in the crucible of Washington politicking and
in-fighting to turn around the military's most troubled service and
win over skeptics in Congress.

   Although Boorda did not attend the 1991 Tailhook convention, a
gathering of naval aviators in Las Vegas where 83 women were
assaulted, he was dogged by its legacy. Cheating and drugs at the
prestigious Naval Academy and a series of crashes involving the
Navy's fleet of aging F-14 fighter jets combined to create an image
of a Navy spinning out of control.

   Now these are Johnson's problems to resolve.

   ``He's got a very tough job ahead of him,'' said Barbara Pope,
who worked with Johnson when she was a senior Navy personnel
official in the Bush administration.

   Senior Pentagon officials expressed hope Wednesday that Johnson,
a tall, striking figure and articulate speaker, would by his sheer
presence and leadership propel the Navy, and its 422,000 men and
women, off the shoals of misfortune.

   But in contrast to the effervescent Boorda, who openly promoted
his common touch with sailors and his skill as a bureaucratic
infighter, Johnson is more self-effacing and is not particularly
well known, even within the Navy.

   ``He's not a big headline grabber,'' said Arthur. ``But people
will expect an awful lot out of him. One thing he does need to do
is keep visible.''

   If the Senate confirms his nomination, Johnson would be one of
the youngest men to head the Navy in this century. He would also
become the first aviator to assume the Navy's top-ranking job since
1982.


NYT-06-05-96 2042EDT



