 nyt960513.0597 
 A4414 
 BC-CRASH-PILOT-LADN 
 05-14 
 0598 

BC-CRASH-PILOT-LADN
FATHER SAYS VALUJET PILOT HAD LIFELONG LOVE OF PLANES
(For use by NYTimes News Service clients)
By STEVE GETZUG
c.1996 Los Angeles Daily News



   LOS ANGELES  --  Hugh Chamberlin never had any worries about his
daughter's well-being while she piloted commercial jets.

   Candalyn ``Candi'' Kubeck, her father said Monday, was an
experienced aviator who turned a childhood love for airplanes into
a career that won her family's admiration.

   ``She was such a careful pilot, which is why I think it was the
equipment on Flight 592,'' said Chamberlin, a resident of the
Encino section of Los Angeles. ``I think that something electrical
probably flooded the cockpit with toxic fumes ... Nothing could be
done.''

   Kubeck, believed to be the first woman commercial jetliner
captain to die in a U.S. crash, was among 104 passengers and five
crew members killed Saturday when her ValuJet plane crashed into
the Florida Everglades.

   The Atlanta-bound DC-9 crashed shortly after takeoff from Miami.
The crew radioed urgently about smoke in the cockpit and cabin
before the tower lost contact.

   The crash and Kubeck's death has left her family devastated.

   Kubeck, who first entered a major airline cockpit in 1989,
turned 35 Friday. Chamberlin said he and his wife, Joan, had
planned to take their daughter to see ``Beauty and the Beast'' in
Los Angeles on Wednesday to celebrate.

   ``We were overwhelmed by this event, this tragedy,'' Chamberlin
said. ``She loved to fly. She expressed so much intelligence and so
much love. Those are the things that will be with us.''

   Kubeck's husband, Roger Kubeck, is a pilot with American West
Airlines.

   Family members say Candi Kubeck was captivated by the military
aircraft she saw in the skies while growing up in Southern
California. She hoped to fly, just like her grandfather who flew
biplanes during World War I.

   Kubeck studied at the Berkeley Hall School in Bel-Air and
Palomar College near San Marcos.

   She graduated from Metropolitan State College in Denver, where
she studied aviation and competed in a flight team that challenged
teams from the Air Force Academy in Colorado Springs.

   She began her career as a pilot instructor at small airfields
and working at various commuter and freight airlines. Her career
breakthrough came in 1989, when she crossed the picket lines at
Eastern Airlines.

   Chamberlin, a management consultant, said the airlines' training
facilities were among the best in the industry, and his daughter
learned to fly some of the nation's largest and most modern jets,
including Eastern's biggest plane, the Airbus 300.

   She was hired in 1993 at ValuJet.

   Chamberlin said his daughter never expressed safety concerns at
ValuJet, but recalled Kubeck noting that some of the fleet had
reached a ``pretty senior age.''

   He said she was excited about the company's recent orders for
new planes from the McDonnell Douglas Corp.

   The ValuJet DC-9 that crashed Saturday was 27 years old.

   Patrice King, who is setting up a scholarship fund in her
stepsister's memory, said flying was Kubeck's ``lifelong passion.''

   ``We feel that the scholarship fund is something that Candi
would like to have done, to help others live out her dream,'' King
said.

   The Kubecks were married for eight years and have no children.

   Her family has established the Candi Chamberlin Kubeck
Scholarship Fund for Aspiring Young Pilots. Contributions may be
sent to King at Home Savings of America, 17107 Ventura Blvd.,
Encino, Calif. 91316.


NYT-05-14-96 0036EDT



