 nyt960719.0753 
 A1759 
 BC-TWA-SEARCH-HNS 
  
 07-19 

BC-TWA-SEARCH-HNS
SEAMAN KEEPS THINKING OF STUFFED TWEETIE BIRD FISHED FROM WATER
(For use by New York Times News Service clients.)
By BENNETT ROTH
c.1996 Houston Chronicle



   EAST MORICHES, N.Y.  --  Tom Coonan had been at sea less than two
days when his U.S. Coast Guard cutter was forced by rough weather
to abandon its search Friday for the remains of TWA Flight 800.

   On his way back to port, the 19-year-old seaman kept thinking
about the four-foot, stuffed Tweetie Bird he had fished from the
water.

   ``I thought about a little kid sitting near his mom holding that
bird,'' he said. ``And then, it's over.''

   For Coonan and 10 other crew members of the Coast Guard cutter
Point Wells, the past two days have been unsettling. Their vessel,
once a patrol boat in Vietnam, was one of the first to arrive off
eastern Long Island early Thursday, just hours after the
Paris-bound Boeing 747 exploded and plunged into the Atlantic.

   ``You could smell it in the air. You knew something had
happened,'' said Coonan, a Vermont native.

   ``It was eerie when you know what's out there,'' said Chris
Biswurm, 23, another Point Wells crewman. ``We were just out there
steaming through this stuff.''

   Donald Kreesim, a senior chief petty officer, said he had tried
to prepare his young crew for what he knew would be an emotionally
difficult task when the Point Wells left port. He even refused to
let the crew watch television, fearing it might distract them and
make their jobs even harder.

   ``We had a mission to concentrate on,'' said Kreesim, 40.

   Since late Wednesday, the Point Wells and hundreds of other
vessels have scoured the Atlantic off Long Island, looking for
bodies, plane debris and any possessions of the 230 people who
boarded the plane at New York's John F. Kennedy Airport.

   Search and rescue efforts were hampered Friday by rain and heavy
seas.

   Waves as high as six feet forced the Coast Guard to recall some
of its smaller boats. Divers, who had been expected to begin their
search for debris on the ocean floor, were unable to get into the
water.

   Officials feared the turbulent water was spreading the debris
and moving some of it into deeper water, which would increase the
difficulty of retrieving bodies and wreckage.

   ``The weather is not playing in our favor,'' said Blair Thomas,
public affairs officer for the Coast Guard.

   On Saturday, the Navy is expected to bring in divers and special
equipment that can be lowered in the water to pick up the
high-pitched signal from the flight data recorders  --  the so-called
black boxes  --  aboard the aircraft.

   Meanwhile, residents have been reporting pieces of the wreckage
washing ashore.

   Ed O'Connell found a charred tray table, the kind normally
attached to the rear of airplane seats, near his home about 15
miles from the crash site.

   O'Connell, who showed reporters his find, said he figured it was
part of the plane when he noticed the wording ``Life Vest under
your seat'' etched on the tray bottom.

   Meanwhile, those who observed the jumbo jet exploding say they
still have vivid memories. Captain Chris Baur of the New York
International Guard, was flying his helicopter when the plane went
down.

   ``There was an explosion followed by a bigger explosion followed
by a bigger explosion,'' Baur recalled. ``It spiraled down like a
corkscrew until it hit the ocean.''

   Baur said he became aware of the magnitude of the loss when he
sighted as many as 80 bodies in the water.


NYT-07-19-96 2227EDT



