 nyt960530.0683 
 A4546 
 BC-FLA-CRASH-NYT 
  
 05-30 

BC-FLA-CRASH-NYT
DC-9 COCKPIT TAPE CONTAINS NOISE SUPPORTING BLAST THEORY
(sw)
By MATTHEW L. WALD
c.1996 N.Y. Times News Service



   WASHINGTON  --  The cockpit voice recorder of the Valujet Airlines
DC-9 that crashed in the Everglades on May 11 recorded ``a brief
unidentified sound'' less than six minutes after takeoff, and
almost immediately, the captain ``stated the need to go back to
Miami,'' National Transportation Safety Board investigators said on
Thursday evening.

   The investigators' brief statement does not say what the sound
was, and, in fact, refers to it four times on a single page as
``unidentified.'' But a chronology in the statement seems to show
that the crew acted properly in response to the noise.

   The crash killed all 110 people on board, and investigators
found parts of oxygen generators embedded in a fire-damaged tire.
Aviation experts said on Thursday evening that a possible source of
the sound would be the pop of a spare aircraft tire if it had been
heated by a fire in the forward cargo hold. The board has already
said that the plane was carrying oxygen generators, which can start
fires, and that some of these had been stacked on top of an
inflated tire.

   The flight data recorder, which has already been analyzed, gives
evidence that there might have been an explosion on board. The
statement released on Thursday, describing a preliminary analysis
of the voice recorder, did not state unequivocally that the sound
was related to the crash but gives a partial chronology keyed
around that event: The sound occurred about 5 minutes and 47
seconds after takeoff; the captain ``questioned'' the sound; 17
seconds after hearing it, she said the plane, which was still
climbing on its way to Atlanta, must return to Miami.

   Five seconds later, ``voices were heard from the passenger cabin
reporting fire.'' Eleven seconds after that, the co-pilot radioed
for clearance to return. The crash occurred about seven minutes
later.

   The sequence, as described by the investigators, indicates that
the crew took prompt action to try to land, which aviation experts
say is the most important step pilots can take in the event of a
fire. An unresolved question is whether the plane could have landed
closer than Miami.

   The statement also said ``the aircraft and systems appear normal
before the unidentified sound.'' Afterwards, the statement said,
there were two apparent interruptions of power to the cockpit voice
recorder. The first began 1 minute and 39 seconds after the sound
and lasted 1 minute and 17 seconds; the second was just before the
end of the tape.

   Aviation experts say the reason could be fire damage to the
plane's electrical system, or could be the crew, believing that the
problem was an electrical fire, turning off various electrical
systems. Electrical problems have not been ruled out.


NYT-05-30-96 2007EDT



