 nyt960905.0652 
 A6992 
 BC-TWA-CRASH-NYT 
  
 09-05 

BC-TWA-CRASH-NYT
ROUGH SEAS PARALYZE SEARCH FOR PLANE WRECKAGE
(sw)
By ANDREW C. REVKIN
c.1996 N.Y. Times News Service



   SMITHTOWN, N.Y.  --  On the 50th day after the crash of Trans World
Airlines Flight 800, senior investigators said that persistent
rough seas off the coast of Long Island had paralyzed efforts to
collect the remaining wreckage of the shattered jumbo jet.

   The only activity by divers in the past seven days was one
six-hour mission completed early on Thursday morning, Robert
Francis, the vice chairman of the National Transportation Safety
Board, said. The divers, from the Navy ship Grapple, were able to
reach the last remaining large field of debris, but rising seas on
the surface and storm-stirred silt on the bottom reduced visibility
to almost zero and limited them to one haul of only a dozen small
pieces of wreckage, Francis said.

   Even those pieces remained on the stern of the ship as seas grew
rougher on Thursday, leaving investigators ashore with no new flow
of potential clues to the cause of the explosion that split the jet
on July 17, killing all 230 people aboard.

   With one hurricane recently departed and another one stirring
the Atlantic anew, conditions were so bad on Thursday morning,
Francis said, that a wave knocked him into the water as it swept
the Navy speedboat carrying him and several other investigators to
the Grapple.

   ``Fortunately, the admiral was kind enough to come back and get
me,'' Francis said of Rear Adm. Edward Kristensen, the pilot of the
speedboat and the Navy officer in charge of the salvage effort.

   Even though more than two-thirds of the aircraft had been
recovered as of a week ago, and much of that debris has been
closely scrutinized, criminal and transportation investigators say
they still lack sufficient evidence to show that the explosion was
caused by a bomb or missile rather than a mechanical failure.

   In a new sign that investigators still lacked many of the pieces
shed by the airplane in the earliest moments of its disintegration,
Francis said that as soon as weather permitted a sonar sweep of the
bottom would be extended west and south of the areas that had
already been searched.

   The decision to backtrack another half mile along the ill-fated
plane's path from Kennedy International Airport was made after a
new analysis of the last radar traces of pieces falling from the
airplane, Kristensen said.

   Despite the lack of new wreckage pulled from the ocean, Francis
said, investigative teams at a complex of hangars in Calverton,
were still busy working with what they already had. He said new
pieces were added on Thursday to a growing reconstruction of the
cabin between the wings.

   But some of the most coveted pieces of wreckage were still
missing, he said, including many parts of the center fuel tank,
which sat under a group of seats that many investigators say were
the likely center of the explosion.

   On Thursday, Francis confirmed previous reports that two seats
at the right end of row 23 had large holes ripped in their metal
backs. ``They may turn out to be significant,'' he said, but he
cautioned that ``there are a lot of ways things can get holes in
them after an airplane accident.''


NYT-09-05-96 2017EDT



