 nyt960827.0077 
 A4944 
 PM-HIJACK-COX 
 08-27 
 0486 

PM-HIJACK-COX
HIJACKED SUDANESE AIRLINER LANDS IN BRITAIN
By LOUIS J. SALOME
c.1996 Cox News Service



   STANSTED, England  --  Police negotiated today with several
hijackers believed to be Iraqis who seized a Sudan Airways plane
with 199 people aboard and demanded that it be flown to Britain.

   After nearly five hours of negotiations, 160 passengers, most of
them women and children, were allowed to leave the plane. But the
other 26 passengers along with 13 crew remained on board along with
``six or seven'' hijackers claiming to be carrying grenades and
explosives, police said.

   Police said the hijackers were accompanied by their families and
had asked to see a member of the Iraqi Community Association in
London, an organization that helps Iraqis seeking aslyum.

   Essex County police said the passengers were mostly Sudanese,
but included Syrians, Saudis, Jordanians and Palestinians. None of
the released passengers were mistreated, although three were sick
and had been taken to a hospital, police said. Their illnesses were
unrelated to the ordeal.

   Police were questioning the released hostages at a nearby
terminal as negotations with the hijackers, conducted by radio,
continued.

   ``Everyone seems calm and collected. My understanding is that no
one has been hurt,'' said Essex police spokeswoman Kim White said.

   Sudan Airways Flight 150 was hijacked Monday evening about 25
minutes after it left the Sudanese capital of Khartoum heading for
Amman, Jordan.

   The Airbus 310 jetliner landed at Larnaca International Airport
in Cyprus to refuel before being forced on to London. Cyprus
aviation officials quoted one hijacker as saying he wanted
political asylum in Britain.

   The plane arrived at Stansted, London's third airport 30 miles
to the northeast, at 4:30 a.m. today (11:30 p.m., Eastern time,
Monday). Armed and masked Essex police officers surrounded the
aircraft as it stood in an isolated spot on the tarmac two miles
from the terminal.

   In hijack situations, British authorities usually direct planes
to Stansted, which is especially prepared for such events and is
located in a rural area, rather than to the busier Heathrow or
Gatwick airports.

   It has been 14 years since a hijacked airplane has landed in
Britain.

   About a dozen police, fire and rescue vehicles were arrayed far
from the plane in case of an accident or if the negotiations turned
sour.

   Police said the hijackers were releasing the passengers in
groups of 10 or so at a time and that they hoped more would be
freed.

   It was the second hijacking this year involving a Sudanese
airliner.

   On March 24, a Sudan Airways Airbus A320 plane carrying 40
passengers and crew on an internal flight was hijacked to Asmara,
the Eritrean capital, where the two Sudanese hijackers surrendered
and sought political asylum.


NYT-08-27-96 0608EDT



