Salmon Puts Angels on Track
By TYLER KEPNER
 NAHEIM, Calif., Oct. 20 ? They call him Kingfish. It is an obvious nickname for a player named Tim Salmon, but there is more to it than that. Salmon is the dean of the Anaheim Angels, their quiet leader. He has been here 11 years, playing through pain, living with the heartbreak that defined this franchise for decades.
Tonight, in an effort decidedly upstream for the Angels, Salmon gave the performance of a lifetime. He reached base five times and homered twice, including the game-winning two-run shot in the eighth inning that propelled the Angels to an 11-10 victory over the San Francisco Giants in Game 2 of the World Series at Edison Field.
It was the Angels' first World Series victory and evened the four-of-seven-game series at 1-1. Francisco Rodriguez, a 20-year-old right-hander with a sizzling fastball and wicked slider, worked three perfect innings for his fifth postseason victory.
"I knew I got it," Salmon said. "I knew the situation, and I knew it was big. You had a feeling it was going to come down to something like that, the way both teams were playing. It's something I've been dreaming about doing for a long time, and watching it being done from my couch. It's unbelievable."
Salmon homered into the left-field bullpen off Felix Rodriguez with two outs in the eighth inning, snapping a 9-9 tie. The Angels brought in Troy Percival for the top of the ninth, and with two outs, he challenged Barry Bonds with a 97-mile-an-hour fastball.
It was the best pitch Bonds saw on a frustrating night, and he punished it into the right-field bleachers for a homer. Salmon and Angels Manager Mike Scioscia, called it the longest homer they had seen at Edison Field.
With the lead cut to one run, Percival recovered to retire Benito Santiago on a pop-up, ending 237 heart-pounding minutes of baseball.
"We both went back and forth, back and forth," Giants Manager Dusty Baker said. "That's one of the best games I've ever been in. We just came up on the short end of things. But that was a tremendous game on both sides."
With 28 hits, 11 pitchers and 44,584 fans waving countless stuffed rally monkeys, it was the zaniest World Series game since Toronto's 15-14 victory over Philadelphia exactly nine years ago.
"That's one of the best games I've ever been involved in," Scioscia said.
No star twinkled as brightly as Salmon, the senior Angel, except for Francisco Rodriguez, who had never pitched in the majors until late September. He was unhittable and allowed the Angels to get back into the game.
Salmon's homer came right after a long at-bat by Darin Erstad, who flied out to left but may have succeeded in tiring Felix Rodriguez. Baker thought Rodriguez might be tired, so he sent his pitching coach, Dave Righetti, to the mound before Salmon hit.
Baker considered bringing in Tim Worrell, but Salmon has hit Worrell well in his career and is generally a better low-ball hitter. He got a high pitch from Rodriguez and pounced, becoming the hero for a team that has always needed one.
"There's a lot of things I'm not going to realize until later," Salmon said. "But right now, the biggest thing was to get a win."
It did not come easily for the Angels, even after their five-run first inning. Anaheim scored seven times off Russ Ortiz in the first two innings, but Kevin Appier and the bullpen frittered the lead away.
Then Francisco Rodriguez came in, and everything changed. He struck out the first two Giants he faced on sliders, then fired a fastball on his first pitch to Bonds, who blistered it to first for a groundout. Rodriguez struck out two in the seventh, and retired the side in the eighth.
It was nine up, nine down against a Giants offense that had been so overwhelming in the early innings. When Salmon homered, it made Rodriguez a winner. He had never won a game in the regular season before becoming an October hero.
Rodriguez remembered watching the World Series on TV last fall at his home in Venezuela. He had just completed a season as a starter at Class A ball and could not have imagined where he would be in one year.
"I told my mom, `One of those days, I want to be there,' " Rodriguez said. "It's a dream come true, doing it the next year."
The victory rewarded the Angels for an historic first inning. No team has scored more runs in the first inning of a World Series game since 1960, a year before the Angels were born. It was the third time since then that a team scored five in the first, and Ortiz was the only pitcher to last through the inning.
He kept pitching, and the same thing kept happening: ball one. Ortiz threw a ball on his first pitch to 12 of his 14 hitters, and by the time he got his first out, he was already behind, 2-0.
Brad Fullmer, Ortiz's former teammate at Montclair Prep in Van Nuys, Calif., came to bat with one out and runners at the corners. His liner to center sent Kenny Lofton, sprawling to the grass; he deflected the ball with his bare hand to prevent extra bases.
Scott Spiezio followed with his single, scoring Garret Anderson and bringing up Bengie Molina with runners at the corners. Spiezio took off for second as Ortiz threw a 1-2 pitch in the dirt.
Catcher Santiago fired high to second, and Fullmer scampered home on a delayed steal. It was the first steal of home in the World Series since 1964, by St. Louis's Tim McCarver, who watched this one from the Fox broadcast booth.
With Jay Witasick ? last fall's Yankee mop-up man ? warming in the bullpen, the Angels had taken a 5-0 lead. Ortiz escaped in ridiculous fashion: he threw a pitcher over Adam Kennedy's head, but the ball struck the bat and landed in fair territory. Ortiz threw to first for the out.
The lead should have elated Appier. But waiting for him in the batter's box in the top of the second was Bonds. Appier got ahead of him, 1-2, then walked him on three off-speed pitches. When he walked him again in the third after Jeff Kent homered, Scioscia pulled him for the rookie right-hander John Lackey.
Lackey worked two innings, and Scioscia said he could still make his scheduled start in Game 4. It is anybody's guess how outrageous this series will be by then.

---
