

American Carries On With His Father's Dream for Sweden.
By WARREN ST. JOHN.
AUCKLAND, New Zealand, Nov. 16. . 

As the Swedish boat Victory Challenge heads out of its berth in Viaduct Harbor for a quarterfinal match against the French, its backer, Hugo Stenbeck, sends his team off by blowing the horn of his 83-foot yacht, Black Knight, and cranking the stereo to an ear-splitting level. The tune? A raucous heavy-metal fusillade, AC/DC's "T.N.T."

At 23, Stenbeck is the youngest head of an America's Cup syndicate. And while Team Dennis Conner, backed by the New York Yacht Club, usually gets the credit as New York's hometown syndicate, Stenbeck is actually the only New Yorker behind a Cup effort. The son of a Swedish father and an American mother, he grew up in Glen Head on Long Island, went to prep school in Maine, lives on the East Side of Manhattan and attends New York University.
His role at the head of the Swedish syndicate, though, is a reluctant one. His father, the Swedish telecommunications entrepreneur Jan Stenbeck, who was the original backer of the Victory Challenge campaign, died of a heart attack in Paris in August, at 59. News of Stenbeck's death jolted the Victory Challenge camp in Auckland just as the team was launching its boat to a Maori hymn. For a while, there was doubt that the campaign could survive without its founder, a larger- than-life man who spent $25 million for a weeklong millennium party in Stockholm. But Hugo Stenbeck said that at a "crisis management" meeting of executives and family advisers in the hours after his father's death, he made the case to keep his father's dream of a Swedish America's Cup challenge alive.
"I stood up and said, if I can convince you to keep the funding, then I'll go down there to see it through," he said.
A little over three months later, the striking black-hulled boats Orn and Orm ? Swedish for eagle and serpent ? are faring well in Auckland. Victory Challenge has made it to the quarterfinals, where it holds a convincing 3-1 lead over the French entry, Le D?fi Areva. [Le D?fi and Britain's GBR Challenge avoided elimination Sunday when racing was postponed because of high winds.]
With a modest shrine of flowers in its base camp in honor of Jan Stenbeck, the team has dedicated its Cup effort to his memory. "At first it was devastating to get the news," Magnus Holmberg, the skipper, said. "But we were told that we were financially backed and to just go on. It makes us fight harder and work harder."
As his team wends its way through the pack in the America's Cup challenger series for the Louis Vuitton Cup, Hugo Stenbeck is taking his first tentative steps toward a public life. His father was notoriously shy of the news media, but Hugo Stenbeck has appeared at two news conferences, though he did turn down an opportunity for a photo spread in Paris Match. "I haven't done much to deserve media interest," he said.
Despite his team's good fortune on the water, it has been a difficult time for Stenbeck. Immediately after his father's death, he and his siblings, Christina, the eldest at 25, who has taken over much of the family business, Sophie and Max, spent a week at their father's farm in Luxembourg, surrounded by journalists. "We were basically prisoners," he said. "We had to run decoys out to pick up a rental video. I guess that's part of the game, but it was rough."
In that environment, he said, coming to Auckland was a welcome change. "It was a relief to be active and to get into a program like this where there's no such thing as a work week, no such thing as 9 to 5," he said. "You're constantly thinking, constantly in the game. And also being a project that my father focused on makes it that much more important."
For Jan Stenbeck, a lifelong sailor who went to Harvard Business School and who worked at Morgan Stanley in New York, chasing the America's Cup had been a longtime dream. In 1983, after Conner lost the Cup to Australia, Stenbeck later told friends, "I just felt joy." He bought the committee boat used in that race, Black Knight, and built a 90-foot replica of the America's Cup yacht Endeavor.

---
