


F.B.I. Is Harsher to Underlings Than to Bosses, Report Says.
By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS. .
WASHINGTON, Nov. 16. .

 The Federal Bureau of Investigation has an uneven punishment system for employees, with senior managers receiving minor sanctions for misconduct that would bring stronger penalties for lower-level workers, the Justice Department inspector general said on Friday.
Among the examples cited in a report: Several F.B.I. officials under investigation in the fatal shootings at Ruby Ridge, Idaho, received promotions or bonuses, and seven senior officials who submitted false travel vouchers went unpunished.
"We believe that in these cases, F.B.I. senior managers were afforded different and more favorable treatment than less senior F.B.I. employees would have received," the inspector general, Glenn A. Fine, said in the report.
The findings echo contentions of unequal treatment by John Roberts, unit chief of the agency's Office of Professional Responsibility. Mr. Roberts made those charges in Congressional testimony and repeated them last month on "60 Minutes" on CBS. Lawmakers said Mr. Roberts's superiors retaliated against him.
The F.B.I. said in a statement that the incidents in the report occurred before August 2000, when it overhauled its procedures.
"These reforms seek to achieve the F.B.I.'s goal of giving all employees and the American public complete confidence in the F.B.I.'s disciplinary system," the agency said.
In one section of the report, the inspector general focused on the 1992 Ruby Ridge siege, in which the white supremacist Randy Weaver's wife, Vicki Weaver, was killed by an agency sharpshooter. A federal marshal and the Weavers' teenage son were also killed.
Six F.B.I. officials who were involved in the incident received promotions or bonuses while their actions were under investigation.
The Justice Department later found that in the Ruby Ridge inquiry crucial witnesses were not interviewed, and later performance evaluations "appeared to reward agents for `correctly' concluding that F.B.I. officials had acted properly," the report said.
---
