
Investigators Ask Person Involved in Sniper Case to 'Call Us Back'
By FRANCIS X. CLINES with CARLA BARANAUCKAS
 OCKVILLE, Md., Oct. 21 ? In what appears to be a somewhat choppy dialogue, investigators sent another message today to a person they have been in contact with regarding the series of sniper shootings in the Washington, D.C., region that have left nine people dead.
Saying that this statement was the most important thing he had to do at a news conference here this afternoon, Chief Charles A. Moose of the Montgomery Police Department said in a message intended for that individual: "The person you called could not hear everything that you said. The audio was unclear and we want to get it right. Call us back so that we can clearly understand."
Chief Moose declined to answer any questions relating to the communications and the investigation, but he thanked the news media for delivering an earlier message. "That has been very well done," Chief Moose said. "I know that is somewhat awkward and we appreciate that."
This morning, two men were taken into custody outside Richmond and were being questioned, said Sheriff Stuart V. Cook of Hanover County. Neither of the men has been charged in the case.
Sheriff Cook also declined to characterize the men as suspects in the shootings or give any further details.
But he did confirm at a news conference in Richmond, Va., that ballistic tests had confirmed that bullet fragments recovered from a 37-year-old man shot on Saturday outside a Richmond steakhouse were linked to the sniper.
Earlier today, armed local and federal officials converged on a white-and-gray minivan parked by a telephone outside a service station west of Richmond. Witness accounts in the shootings have talked of sightings of a white van.
Up to 30 police cars and a helicopter were involved in today's operation. A witness said one man inside the van was taken into custody at about 8:30 a.m. Eastern time. A second man was later arrested nearby, in Henrico County.
The van, described by witnesses as a white Plymouth Voyager with a luggage rack and temporary Virginia tags, was put onto a tow truck and taken away after a police officer was seen videotaping the interior.
After the arrests, in a brief and cryptic news conference, Chief Moose of the police in Montgomery County, Md., said: "I just want to ask the indulgence of the media that the message that needs to be delivered is that we are going to respond to a message we have received. We will respond later. We are preparing our response at this time."
He did not specify whether the message was a new communication or one discovered near the scene of Saturday's shooting. He refused to elaborate or answer questions.
In an unusual plea on Saturday, directly addressing through television a person he would not identify, Chief Moose said: "You gave us a telephone number. We do want to talk to you. Call us at the number you provided."
Chief Moose, the leader of the investigation, addressed the dramatic appeal to "the person who left us a message at the Ponderosa last night" ? a reference to the restaurant in Ashland, Va., where the man was critically wounded by a single shot as he walked in the parking lot.
Chief Moose's direct message was at once a measure of the desperation of the police in their hunt for the sniper who has freely roamed hundreds of square miles in singling out victims and a suggestion of a rare bit of evidence in the pursuit of a killer who had once before indicated an urge to reach out to his pursuers.
At a shooting scene on Oct. 7, the sniper reportedly left a tarot death card inscribed, "Dear Policeman, I am God." Chief Moose was furious after a detective leaked it to reporters. The chief apparently hoped to make some sort of contact.
Refusing to take any reporters' questions on Sunday, Chief Moose issued his plea with an appeal to news organizations, "Carry it clearly and carry it often."
All else the police might have gleaned from the latest shooting remained secret, particularly the phone number left in the message in Ashland, at the Ponderosa.
As the authorities investigated the latest shooting, they disclosed that a clue that once seemed promising had not panned out. A bullet casing found in a truck in Virginia that had attracted detectives' curiosity on Friday was dismissed as being of a size different from the sniper's.
As the gunshot echoed across a roadside stretch of fast food stores and motels, Saturday's victim, who had stopped for dinner while traveling on nearby Interstate 95, staggered a few feet and collapsed, the police said. They said he managed to tell his wife, "I've been shot."
The victim, his identity kept secret, was taken to the Medical College of Virginia hospital in Richmond where surgeons found that the bullet had torn into his stomach, spleen and pancreas, with fragments lodging in his chest. Doctors said he remained in critical but stable condition after two operations, with further surgery expected. They said they had retrieved a large fragment of the bullet and given it to investigators.
The Ashland shooting signaled the sniper's decision to extend his attacks to the weekend hours. It also extended the circle where he has been preying by a good 40 miles, raising questions about how much farther he might range if he remains on the loose. It clearly unnerved the Richmond area, where classes were canceled on Monday in four public school districts and at Randolph-Macon College in Ashland.
After a series of single-shot attacks in which he killed his first six victims on Oct. 2 and 3 in the northern Washington suburbs around Montgomery County, the sniper has circled through target areas in suburbs to the east, south and west, cutting down individuals with a single shot. 

---
