

Bush Sees Little Hope That Hussein Will Disarm
By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Filed at 4:25 p.m. ET
WASHINGTON (AP) -- President Bush said Monday he does not think Saddam Hussein will disarm, even if doing so would allow the Iraqi leader to remain in power.
``We don't believe he's going to change,'' Bush said after a meeting with NATO Secretary-General George Robertson.
``However, if he were to meet all the conditions of the United Nations, the conditions that I've described very clearly ... that in itself would signal the regime has changed,'' Bush said.

Bush has demanded that Saddam disarm, stop supporting terrorism, end persecution of ethnic groups, stop trading oil illegally, account for a U.S. pilot and soldiers and civilians from other nations missing since the Persian Gulf War and allow witnesses of his illegal activity to be interviewed outside Iraq.
The president's remarks came as senior administration officials sought to dampen any suggestion that Saddam could stay in power if he complies with U.S. demands. In a rapidly changing diplomatic landscape, administration officials have strategically sent mixed signals on whether Bush's push for ``regime change'' requires Saddam's ouster.
Bush and his advisers stress the potential for military action and removal of Saddam while addressing domestic audiences. A congressional resolution signed by the president last week gives him specific authority to use force, and Congress voted during the Clinton administration to make regime change official U.S. policy.
The White House, however, plays down the push to oust Saddam while courting world leaders, who are skeptical of military action. Entering the final stages of U.N. negotiations, Secretary of State Colin Powell suggested Sunday that Saddam could escape removal should he comply with U.N. demands.
Bush spoke as U.S. officials prepared to circulate its proposed U.N. resolution, which contains a warning that defiance of the United Nations will result in ``consequences'' for Baghdad. Allies are balking at the talk of war.
``Diplomacy needs to be backed by force, especially in matters like this,'' State Department spokesman Richard Boucher said, warning allies that it's time to wrap up negotiations and pass a U.S.-backed resolution to disarm Saddam, with force if necessary.
``The policy is regime change, however it is defined,'' White House spokesman Ari Fleischer told reporters.
``Clearly, if Iraq did all the things the president called on him to do - - which they seem to have no inclination to do -- then the very nature of the regime would have changed,'' Fleischer said. ``But I don't think it's realistic for anybody to think that Saddam Hussein has any intention of leaving his regime to change.''
Fleischer said there is little chance that Saddam might meet those demands and force Bush to determine whether the Iraqi leadership should be changed regardless.
``I think this is among the greatest stretches of the hypotheticals, of the possibles, of the unlikelies that you could possibly hypothetically discuss,'' he said. ``Let the changes in ways take place, and then ask me about it.''
Fleischer was just as dismissive about Saddam's move to grant amnesty to political and other prisoners on Sunday.
``It does seem to be a political ploy,'' he said.
Fleischer said a new U.N. resolution will give weapons inspectors more clout to root out and eliminate Saddam's weapons of mass destruction. Saddam will be required to comply with inspections unconditionally and list what weapons of mass destruction Iraq possesses.
``We will have zero tolerance for any violations of a U.N. resolution,'' Fleischer said.
Administration officials said Monday the proposal, upgraded to carry a clear message that Iraq would be disarmed by force if it did not agree to surrender its weapons of mass destruction, was being circulated among Security Council members at the United Nations.
First on the list were France, Russia and China, veto-holding permanent members who have opposed threatening Iraq with military enforcement of a disarmament resolution. The other permanent members are the United States and Britain, co-authors of the new proposed resolution.
Bush has urged the U.N. to confront Saddam or stand aside while he does. Allies were reminded Monday that his patience won't last forever.
State Department spokesman Boucher said that, along with the revised document, ``We're also making clear it is time to wrap this up.''
Nevertheless, France's U.N. ambassador said he didn't think the five permanent members, including his country, were close to agreement.
A top Russian diplomat likewise warned that Moscow would oppose any new resolution on Iraq that would allow ``automatic use of force'' or contain ``unfeasible'' demands.

---
