
U.S. Sniper Case Seen as a Barrier to a Confession
By JAYSON BLAIR

[R] OCKVILLE, Md., Oct. 29 ? State and federal investigators said today that John Muhammad had been talking to them for more than an hour on the day of his arrest in the sniper shootings, explaining the roots of his anger, when the United States attorney for Maryland told them to deliver him to Baltimore to face federal weapons charges and forcing them to end their interrogation.

The investigators said an F.B.I. agent and a Maryland detective had begun to develop a rapport with Mr. Muhammad. The other suspect, Lee Malvo, 17, being questioned by a Montgomery County detective, was not answering any questions, the investigators said.

"It did not look like the juvenile was going to talk," a local law enforcement official said. "But it looked like Muhammad was ready to share everything, and these guys were going to get a confession."

The investigators said they spoke with a reporter to explain why they have been so upset with the federal prosecutor, Thomas M. DiBiagio, who brought federal charges today against Mr. Muhammad. The account was given by two law enforcement officials from Maryland and three federal officials involved in the case.

Two Maryland state officials and two federal officials said that in a conference call with police officials and prosecutors Mr. DiBiagio had said he was "on orders from the Justice Department and the White House" to take the suspects into custody. They said one federal investigator had checked with the criminal division of the Justice Department, which said there was no such order.

Today, the federal government charged Mr. Muhammad with using murder as a way to commit extortion across state lines. Aides to Attorney General John Ashcroft said he wanted to determine the best jurisdiction for the death penalty. [Page A25.]

Federal officials had filed the weapons charge against Mr. Muhammad as a means of holding him. The charges require that he be taken before a federal magistrate soon after being arrested. A senior law enforcement official defended Mr. DiBiagio's decision, saying it was based on the law and an effort to protect the case. "All this was about was being a good lawyer," the official said.

The investigators said, though, that within hours of the arrests of Mr. Muhammad and Mr. Malvo at a rest stop at 3:19 a.m. on Oct. 24 in Myersville, they had enough evidence to file state murder charges, meaning they could continue questioning him for as long as a day before taking him before a judge.

The investigators said they ignored Mr. DiBiagio's first call at 10:30 a.m. By 1 o'clock, they said, Mr. DiBiagio told F.B.I. agents to seize Mr. Muhammad if he was not sent to Baltimore.

A federal law enforcement official dismissed the idea that Mr. Muhammad might have confessed to the killings if the interrogations had continued. The official said Mr. Muhammad "was talking, but he wasn't giving anything relevant to the crimes" in the interrogation.

"I don't believe there's anything to that at all," the official said, referring to a suggestion that Mr. DiBiagio's action had hurt the case. "The investigation has been a fully cooperative enterprise, and everyone's first priority is to bring these guys to justice. So they obviously wouldn't do anything to damage that."

State and federal investigators who were at the Montgomery County police building where Mr. Muhammad and Mr. Malvo were taken on the morning of the arrests recalled the conference call with police officials, prosecutors and Mr. DiBiagio. The investigators now say they do not believe that Mr. DiBiagio was "on orders from the Justice Department and the WHite House" to take the suspects into custody.

A senior federal law enforcement official said that it was routine for the Justice Department to become involved in such decisions but that officials there had not given Mr. DiBiagio any orders and that "the White House had nothing, absolutely nothing, to do with that."

The official said that Mr. Muhammad "was just babbling" and that taking the men to court in Baltimore was a "mutual decision" by prosecutors and members of the sniper task force. This official added that it "wasn't the U.S. attorney coming in and saying, `We're going to do this.' "



---
