

THE DAY IN COLLEGE FOOTBALL.

For Iowa, More Than a Victory Is Gained.
By BILL FINLEY.
NYTimes, The Day in College Football.

The Bowl Championship Series more or less took the day off. Ohio State survived a major scare from Illinois but won and Miami didn't play. After the voters vote and the computers compute, this week's ranking will look a lot like last week's. There have been more tumultuous Saturdays this season, but that meant nothing to hundreds of players with joy spread across their faces yesterday as clocks ran down across the nation.

They were the ones who did not play for a No. 1, a No. 2 or a number anywhere near the precious top two spots in the B.C.S., held by Ohio State and Miami, but for teams that won a conference championship or moved a lot closer to one.
Yes, there is more to a college football season than those niggling B.C.S. numbers. Nowhere was that more evident yesterday than at the Metrodome, where Iowa walloped Minnesota, 45-21, and accomplished something that the Hawkeyes (11-1, 8-0) had not done since 1922: finish with a perfect record in the Big Ten Conference.
Iowa, which has finished its regular season, is guaranteed a share of the Big Ten championship and will win it outright should Ohio State lose next week to Michigan.
When it was over, Coach Kirk Ferentz, who was 0-8 in the Big Ten in 1999, his first season as the Iowa coach, was being carried off the field by players clutching fresh roses. The flowers were emblematic of a possible invitation to the Rose Bowl. The Hawkeyes have not made the trip to Pasadena since 1991. The victory produced one of the stranger sights this year in college football. There were so many Hawkeye fans in the stands that they managed to tear down a goal post on an opponent's field.
"We're a team and everybody played like it today and that's why we're champs," said Iowa quarterback Brad Banks, who threw for two touchdowns and ran for two more.
Florida State improved to 8-3 with a 40-14 victory over North Carolina, but 8-3 is not a satisfying set of numbers for a program that is used to a lot better. But there will at least be a consolation prize this season. The victory clinched at least a share of the Atlantic Coast Conference title, which may mean a trip to the Orange Bowl.
For the once-beaten teams still clinging to a hope of making the national championship game in the Fiesta Bowl, they needed an Ohio State (12-0) loss and didn't get one. While waiting and hoping for either Miami or Ohio State to lose, it was a time to take care of business in conference play.
Washington State (9-1), third in the B.C.S., did not play. At fourth in the B.C.S., Oklahoma (8-1) may stay right where it is after an expected 49-9 trouncing of struggling Baylor. The Sooners probably lost their best chance to play for a national title when they were defeated a week ago by Texas A&M, but a Big 12 title is well within reach. At 5-1 in the conference, they are in control in the Big 12 South.
"We are another step closer to having a chance to win the South and the Big 12 championship," Oklahoma Coach Bob Stoops said. "That is primary, first and foremost on our minds."
Their opponent in the championship game could be Colorado, which remained in first in the Big 12 North with a 41-27 victory over Iowa State.
Georgia (10-1), ranked sixth in the B.C.S., remained a once-beaten team, but not without some drama. A 19-yard touchdown pass from David Greene to Michael Johnson with 1 minute 25 seconds left gave the Bulldogs a 24-21 victory at Auburn. That gave Georgia a flicker of hope in the B.C.S. picture, but more important for the Bulldogs it clinched a spot in the Dec. 7 Southeastern Conference championship game at the Georgia Dome.
"We're going to Atlanta," Georgia linebacker Tony Gilbert said. "We should have been there a long, long time ago."
Auburn's loss also affected the S.E.C. West as the Tigers, now 4-3 in the conference, dropped back in the race for the championship game. Alabama (9-2, 6-1 in the conference) hammered Louisiana State, 31- 0, to remain in first place in the division, but the Crimson Tide is on probation and ineligible for postseason play. L.S.U. dropped to 4-2 in conference play.
Notre Dame (9-1) did not play yesterday and could stay at seventh in the B.C.S. ranking. Despite yesterday's victory and all that it meant, Iowa, at eighth in the B.C.S., has little chance of vaulting to first or second.
There will be one big change in the B.C.S. Texas, fifth entering the day, lost to Texas Tech, 42-38. The Longhorns were the only one of the six major once-beaten teams to lose yesterday.

---
