
The Greatest Threat
By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

The scariest place in the world right now is not Iraq, but rather the Korean peninsula.

We're being blackmailed by a nuclear power, and so President Bush is in an exceptionally difficult situation -- one that he has handled very ably so far. But the administration's game plan to isolate North Korea is, as our allies are desperately trying to tell us, potentially catastrophic.

President Bush wants to squeeze North Korea into abandoning the uranium enrichment program to which it recently confessed. We're almost certain to cut off fuel oil shipments to North Korea.

Unfortunately, the moment we cut off oil shipments and apply economic pressure, North Korea may kick out international inspectors at its nuclear plant in Yongbyon. Then it may threaten to "uncan" the plutonium rods there, preparatory to using them to make nuclear bombs.

North Korea has enough plutonium in Yongbyon to rapidly make at least five nuclear weapons, possibly more. That's its leverage: threatening to turn Yongbyon into a nuclear assembly line, which in turn might ultimately lead Japan and South Korea to go nuclear as well.

So play the scenario out. We cut off fuel oil and introduce sanctions. Then North Korea revives Yongbyon and threatens to uncan the plutonium. From there, it's easy to imagine the U.S. bombing Yongbyon (both the first Bush and the Clinton administrations had contingency plans to do just that), after which North Korea lashes out with artillery at Seoul.

I called Kim Myong Chol, a North Korean unofficial spokesman, who said his country would respond to sanctions not just by reviving Yongbyon, but also by ramping up weapons exports.

"North Korea can export missile and nuclear technology to the highest bidder," he noted dryly. "It's a capitalist practice."

"If America tries to knock out Yongbyon," Mr. Kim added, "North Korea will retaliate immediately on New York and Washington, wipe out South Korea, wipe out Japan."

(I observed to Mr. Kim that I was speaking from Midtown Manhattan. "Well okay," he said obligingly, "maybe not New York. Washington and Chicago instead.")

In fact, North Korea's ballistic missiles probably can't reach the continental U.S. Still, North Korea's artillery can destroy Seoul. Don Oberdorfer, in his book "The Two Koreas," cites an estimate from a former American commander in South Korea that a war could kill one million people, including 100,000 Americans.

Dear Leader Kim Jong Il may also feel that the focus on Iraq gives him more room to push the U.S. around.

"North Koreans firmly believe that the U.S. cannot now make a military strike, because South Korea is a hostage and because of the Iraqi situation," said Han Park, an American scholar who has often visited the North. "That may make North Korea a bit more reckless."

So what should we do?

Donald Gregg, a former ambassador to Seoul who is president of the Korea Society, says imposing sanctions on North Korea "would be crazy." Likewise, a military strike is not feasible, given that it would probably trigger a new Korean war.

On the other hand, how can we accept a North Korea with a large nuclear arsenal? How can we continue to ship fuel oil to the North as if nothing had happened?

That leaves only one alternative, holding our nose and negotiating a deal with North Korea (without ever calling it negotiating, and possibly using proxies like China). The North would give up its nukes and missiles, all sides would agree to end the hostilities of the Korean War (there never was a peace treaty), and Western countries would normalize relations with the North.

"The way to distinguish the hawks from the doves in this administration is the speed with which a person realizes you have to talk to the North," explains a longtime player. "The doves are already there. The hawks are struggling with, and resisting, the notion."

In the coming months, the most delicate problem in international relations will be how to negotiate an end to this crisis. If all sides play their cards wisely, we could not only defuse the confrontation, but also launch North Korea on a path like the one China pursued away from Stalinism.

North Korea is the most totalitarian country in the world, and possibly the most dangerous adversary we face. But that's precisely the reason we need to engage it. 

---
