


Still Ticking: 4 N.F.L. Games Go Into Overtime
By FRANK LITSKY
 eople who love baseball say that much of its beauty comes from its lack of time constraints. People who prefer football say that much of its beauty comes from a moving clock that introduces a time limit into an already exciting game.
Football fans can point to four overtime games in the N.F.L. yesterday. Six games came down to the last two minutes, or at least the last two minutes of regulation time. Only once before, on Oct. 8, 1995, did four games go to overtime. (The Monday night game the next night ended in overtime, too.)

Yesterday, the Denver Broncos and the Detroit Lions scored in the final seconds of regulation and went on to win in overtime.
The San Diego Chargers and the Arizona Cardinals escaped with overtime victories. The Jacksonville Jaguars were intercepted on the last play of their game and lost.
The Broncos, playing the Chiefs in Kansas City, tied the score with 21 seconds left in regulation on Mike Anderson's 2-yard run. In overtime, the Chiefs won the toss and had the first possession, usually a prelude to victory. But the Chiefs went nowhere on three downs, Dan Stryzinski's punt was blocked by Keith Burns and the Broncos' Dwayne Carswell recovered on the Chiefs' 32. When a 25-yard pass-interference penalty against Eric Warfield put the Broncos on the doorstep, Jason Elam kicked a 25-yard field goal and the Broncos won, 37-34.
The Lions, playing host to the Chicago Bears, also won the hard way. With 2 seconds remaining in regulation, they tied the score on Jason Hanson's 24-yard field goal. In overtime, the Lions got the ball first and ran seven straight times, setting up Hanson's 48-yard field goal that decided the game, 23-20.
With 1 minute 21 seconds left in the fourth quarter, the Oakland Raiders forced overtime against the visiting Chargers on Rich Gannon's 7-yard pass to Jon Ritchie. The Chargers, who won the coin flip, drove 80 yards in 8 plays to win, 27-21, on LaDainian Tomlinson's 19-yard run. As the Chargers celebrated in the end zone, fans showered them with debris.
No one seemingly could win the game in Tempe, Ariz., between the Cardinals and the Dallas Cowboys. With the score 6-6 in the fourth quarter, Bill Gramatica of the Cardinals missed field goals from 28 and 51 yards. With 24 seconds left, Billy Cundiff of the Cowboys missed from 49 yards. Late in overtime, Gramatica connected from 40 yards, and the Cardinals won, 9-6.
In Baltimore, the Ravens, playing again without the injured linebacker Ray Lewis, got by the Jaguars, 17-10, but this one almost went into overtime, too. The Jaguars moved to the Ravens' 25, but the Ravens escaped when Will Demps intercepted a Mark Brunell pass on the last play.
No performance was more dramatic than Michael Vick's return to the Falcons in Atlanta. Vick, who had missed the previous game against the Giants with an ailing right (nonthrowing) shoulder, came back and almost single-handedley wiped out Carolina, 30-0.
Vick scored on a 44-yard run, tiptoeing down the sideline. In all, he gained 91 yards on 6 carries. He completed 16 of 22 passes for 178 yards. He also caught a lateral and was credited with 28 yards receiving. All this in only three quarters.
"It's amazing," he said afterward. "I just get up after some plays and say, `Oh, man, I can't wait to see that one on film.' "
Mike Minter, a Panthers safety, was impressed. "It's totally different than reading about him or seeing him on film or TV," he said. "The guy is quick, fast and strong. I mean, we had him dead-on a couple of times."
It was a big rushing day for Marshall Faulk of the St. Louis Rams (183 yards and 4 touchdowns), James Stewart of the Detroit Lions (172 yards) and the Chargers' Tomlinson (153). It was also a strong day in a losing cause for Fred Taylor of the Jacksonville Jaguars (151 yards rushing and 46 receiving).
The Broncos' Brian Griese passed for 376 yards and the Raiders' Gannon 361. Shannon Sharpe of the Broncos gained 214 yards receiving, a record for a tight end.
At the other extreme, Ray Lucas, starting at quarterback for the injured Jay Fiedler of the Miami Dolphins, threw four interceptions and was involved in two lost fumbles.
His assessment: "The way I played today was probably the worst a quarterback has ever played in the history of the N.F.L."