



Redskins Learning That You Can't Win With Spurrier Alone.
By THOMAS GEORGE.
NYTimes, ASHBURN, Va., Nov. 15.

 By now, the Redskins were supposed to have a winning record, definitely the league's best offense, maybe the league's best defense, a thousand touchdown passes and two million points. By now, the rookie N.F.L. coach Steve Spurrier was going to be the league's anointed wizard on pitching and catching footballs and his peers were supposed to be buried in video devising a way to stop the madness.
But since Washington has a 4- 5 record, has only once won consecutive games, ranks 21st in offense, 22nd in passing offense, ninth in defense, has already started all three of its quarterbacks and in the fourth quarter of its losses has been outscored by 30-6 with zero points in four of those fourth quarters, it is clear that Washington's performance is not matching its preseason hype.
That Spurrier's Fun 'n' Gun offense has fizzled.
And the fallout can be brutal.
The Redskins enter Giants Stadium on Sunday with one foot stuck in mediocrity and the other one dancing in hope. This is a team with a layered and fragile psyche that is privately beginning to question Spurrier's offensive direction and play-calling and publicly challenging itself to begin its trek through the N.F.C. East against the Giants with renewed purpose and results.
Win and the Redskins have a 5-5 record and are even with the Giants. They would trail only Philadelphia with four divisional games left, including one against the Eagles.
Lose and they fall to 4-6 and a tough season becomes an unbearable one.
With Spurrier, the former University of Florida coach, as their celebrated leader, what happened? What happened in Jacksonville last week was that Spurrier called 51 pass plays, 16 runs and Washington lost, 26-7. What has happened all season is Spurrier calling 320 pass plays and 229 running plays with a team that seems far more suited to travel by ground than by air.
Thus far, Spurrier has insisted on traveling by jet. Expectations were that his offense would fly circles around the league.
"It ain't that kind of world," Redskins cornerback Fred Smoot said, "and the N.F.L. ain't like that. No matter who you are, people in this league go through their trials. It's not a question of what he calls, it's more a question of when he calls it. To me, it's a question of Rod Gardner, who is definitely our best receiver, getting 10 to 15 catches a game every game just because he's that good, instead of sometimes being ignored. It's a matter of our defense standing together and playing like one instead of making excuses and silly mistakes."
So, do the Redskins become more grounded against the Giants with running back Stephen Davis or does their passing game click and Spurrier win with his style, his way? Or do they continue to spin backward?
"I'm waiting to see if we are going to start pounding the ball with the running game," defensive end Bruce Smith said. "I think a lot of us are."
Offensive tackle Chris Samuels added about Spurrier: "He is the coach of this team and anything that happens with it is a reflection on him. The talent is not meeting the expectations. And because of what coach Spurrier did in college, with all of the success he had, it makes him an easy target."
Linebacker LaVar Arrington keeps reminding his teammates that if they win the rest of their divisional games, everything will take care of itself.
"Right now we have some odds to overcome but I still feel like we can make these playoffs," Arrington said. "We have to try and block out the stuff on the fringes because things are not as bad as they look."
Cornerback Champ Bailey said: "We're not where we want to be but we're not out of the picture. Last year in the second half of the season, we kicked in and won 8 of our last 11 games. We can do even better in our last seven this time."
Last season, Washington was 8-8 and that was their record in the preceding season. They have had four head coaches in the last three seasons and four straight seasons with new defensive coordinators. Marvin Lewis, their current defensive coordinator, will most likely leave for a head coaching job in the pros or colleges after this season.
All around, the Redskins are still seeking consistency.
Lewis is looking for his defense to improve its tackling.
---
