


U.S. Turns Horn of Africa Into a Military Hub.

By MICHAEL R. GORDON .
NYTimes, JIBOUTI, Nov. 16. .



For the first time since American troops withdrew from Somalia after a bloody firefight in the streets of Mogadishu, the United States military is rebuilding its combat power in the Horn of Africa.
The main goal this time is to put American forces in position to strike cells of Al Qaeda in Yemen or East Africa. But the Pentagon has also begun to use Djibouti to train its forces in desert warfare ? skills that could be applied in Washington's campaign against terrorist groups or on the battlefields of Iraq.

"We are getting heavy weapons ashore and firing," said Col. John Mills, the commander of the 24th Marine Expeditionary Unit, which has been conducting a major military exercise here for just over a week. "I am preparing my unit to operate in a high-intensity conflict."
At a dusty, parched and desolate stretch of African desert, marines used live ammunition as they practiced infantry assaults. Marine howitzers lobbed shells six miles. Harrier jets dropped 500-pound bombs, and Super Cobra helicopter gunships raked the ground with fire. M-1 tanks and other armored vehicles blasted their targets.
Bereft of oil or valuable resources, the impoverished nation of Djibouti has long been a desirable base for Western militaries. Put simply, what Djibouti offers is location. It is close to Yemen and near the Bal el Mandeb Strait, a critical choke-point where the Red Sea meets the Gulf of Aden. The sea lanes near Djibouti are particularly crucial since they are used for commercial shipping and to transport American war mat?riel to the Persian Gulf.
Djibouti has other advantages for the American military as well, including a serviceable airport and harbor. The country is accustomed to the presence of Western military forces and is politically stable.
France, which had colonized Djibouti (pronounced ji-BOOT-e) before it became independent in 1977, still maintains a force of 2,800 strong here. Djibouti, in fact, is France's largest foreign military base.
American marines who have landed on the northern coast of Djibouti three times this year in major exercises are fast becoming regular, if temporary, visitors, but other forces are digging in for the long haul.
The United States Central Command is setting up a military headquarters to oversee operations in and around the Horn of Africa. Led by a Marine officer, Maj. Gen. John Sattler, the headquarters will initially be based on the amphibious command ship Mount Whitney, but it will probably be moved ashore.
About 800 American Special Operations forces and other American troops have already moved into Camp Lemonier, a former French barracks near the Djibouti airport that the Americans have turned into a bastion.
The military is not the only American organization that has found Djibouti to be a convenient launching pad. The Central Intelligence Agency is flying classified missions from an airfield in Djibouti using the Predator, an pilotless drone equipped with Hellfire missiles, according to Western officers.
The C.I.A. missions include a recent strike in which a car was blasted in a Predator attack in a remote area of Yemen, killing a Qaeda operative and five other occupants of the vehicle.
The clandestine flights have occasionally thrown a scare into the Western navies that operate in the region and which have at times mistaken the drone for a possible terrorist kamikaze. With a diverse array of American and European naval, air and land forces and a variety of security agendas, the Horn of Africa is becoming an increasingly complex military arena.
This is not the first time that the American military has used Djibouti. AC-130 gunships were stationed here during the American military intervention in Somalia in the early 1990's. Navy ships also stopped here for fuel until the refueling operation was shifted to Aden, Yemen. The decision was made to build ties with Yemen's government and provide a more secure environment for replenishing Navy ships, but backfired when the American destroyer Cole was attacked by terrorists in 2000.
After the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks in New York and Washington and the subsequent war in Afghanistan, the Horn of Africa became an important hub for military planners.

---
