
Israeli Coalition Collapsing as Labor Ministers Resign
By JAMES BENNET

[J] ERUSALEM, Oct. 30 - Talks designed to prevent a breakup of the 19-month-old coalition government ended in failure today, resulting in the resignation of Defense Minister Benjamin Ben-Eliezer.

The decision by Mr. Ben-Eliezer, the leader of the left-leaning Labor Party, presaged an almost certain vote by Labor representatives in Parliament against a budget proposed by Prime Minister Ariel Sharon.

Labor has complained that the budget favors settlers over the poor, but Mr. Sharon has said he would dismiss anyone from his government who opposed his plan.

``We did everything possible to preserve the government, but to my great regret there were those who believed that this was the time to break up the government,'' said Finance Minister Silvan Shalom of the Likud Party, which is led by Mr. Sharon.

A Labor legislator, Haim Ramon, who is challenging Mr. Ben-Eliezer for party leadership, praised the defense minister's decision.

``I'm happy that we will not be partners in a government that is a failure in all aspects of life,'' Mr. Ramon said. ``We need to leave the government and present an alternative.''

Mr. Sharon has said that he would govern without Labor, with a narrower coalition. If he is unable to sustain that government, which would be more right wing, elections would probably be held within 90 days.

Earlier there was air of optimism about the talks as two private lawyers shuttled all day between the party leaders.

The Israeli public has made it overwhelmingly clear in opinion polls that it prefers the continuation of the broad-based coalition government.

A confrontation dismissed by politicians and analysts days ago as mere posturing has now revealed itself as Mr. Sharon's most dire political crisis.

Labor has repeatedly trimmed its policies to fit Mr. Sharon's approach to the economy and security. But Mr. Ben-Eliezer is trailing in a three-way race to remain as party leader, with internal Labor elections set for Nov. 19. Either of his competitors, if victorious, would almost certainly pull Labor out of the government, depriving Mr. Ben-Eliezer of his powerful defense job anyway.

He has now chosen to make a stand - over a relatively small slice of the budget, $147 million - on an issue that combines an appeal to his left-wing base with a broader, populist draw.

Mr. Ben-Eliezer wants the money shifted from settlements to finance social programs, like pensioners' benefits, that are being cut to restrain an expanding budget deficit.

It is a showdown more about social and economic priorities than Israel's familiar concern with security, but it threatens to undermine the national consensus behind Mr. Sharon's hard-line approach toward Palestinians and shift Israel's government further to the right.

Late Tuesday night, a Palestinian gunman penetrated the fence of an Israeli settlement, Hermesh, on the northern West Bank near Jenin. He opened fire on people walking outside their homes, killing two teenage girls and a woman, Israeli security officials said, before being shot dead himself in a firefight with residents and soldiers. Al Aksa Martyrs' Brigade, a militant group affiliated with Yasir Arafat's Fatah movement, claimed responsibility for the attack.

The killings illustrated once again how explosive the issue of Israeli settlements in the West Bank remains. Mr. Sharon has shown broad support for the settlements.

As the Israeli political situation deepened, Mr. Arafat, who in more than three decades as Palestinian leader has seen Israeli cabinets and prime ministers come and go, blunted reformers' demands, at least for now. He gained support on Tuesday for a new government that closely resembled his old one.

Labor ministers said that Mr. Sharon's budget priorities were scrambled, favoring settlers over pensioners. ``We can't accept that there is one sector in Israeli society - and I mean the settlers - who are exempted from shouldering the burden,'' said Ephraim Sneh, the minister of transportation.

---
