

Navy to Limit Sonar Testing Thought to Hurt Sea Mammals.
By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS.

SAN FRANCISCO, Nov. 16. .

 The Navy has agreed to scale back temporarily the testing of a new sonar system designed to detect enemy submarines.
The agreement was reached on Friday after months of protests by environmentalists and two weeks after a federal magistrate judge blocked the testing, citing concerns about marine life.

The accord is a compromise between the government and the ecologists who filed a lawsuit over the testing. It will last seven months while the Navy's operating permit is challenged in federal court.
Magistrate Judge Elizabeth LaPorte had already blocked the Navy from experimenting with the system, which was to be routinely tested throughout the world's oceans.
The Navy had planned to test the system in about 14 million square miles of ocean. Under the agreement, the Navy will limit its tests to about a million square miles of remote ocean around the Mariana Islands.
"It's the least sensitive area of ocean we could get," said Andrew Wetzler, an lawyer with the Natural Resources Defense Council, which says the Navy system can harass or kill marine mammals.
The sonar system can send signals hundreds of miles. It can be as loud as 215 decibels, as much noise as a twin-engine F-15 fighter jet makes when it takes off.
The agreement does not prevent the Navy from using the system to detect modern, quiet submarines in wartime, and it acknowledges that the Navy must be allowed to train with it.
Neither the Navy nor the Justice Department returned calls seeking comment. The judge ordered all discussions between the environmental group and the Navy to remain confidential.
The Natural Resources Defense Council said Navy sonar used in March 2000 may have caused at least 16 whales and 2 dolphins to beach themselves on islands in the Bahamas. Eight whales died, and scientists found bleeding around their brains and ear bones, injuries consistent with exposure to loud noise.
---
