
Deadly Car Bomb Explodes in Northern Israel
By JOEL GREENBERG with MARK J. PRENDERGAST
 ERUSALEM, Oct. 21 ? An Israeli bus was destroyed by a car bomb on a highway in northern Israel today, the authorities said, and medical workers and others at the scene reported at least 13 people killed and at least 30 injured.
"There are many wounded and several dead," the regional police chief, Moshe Waldman, told Israel's Channel Two television.
said on Israel radio that a car had approached the bus from the left rear, stopped and then exploded, with the back of the bus taking the brunt of the blast. His description indicated that the attack was a suicide bombing rather than a remote-controlled car bombing.
Television pictures showed the bus gutted and scorched by fire and several other vehicles severely damaged. Witnesses spoke of a mushroom cloud of flame and smoke followed by an inferno that burned passengers trapped in the bus and kept rescuers at bay for some time.
The driver, who was identified by Israeli television as Haim Avraham, said that about 30 people were aboard the bus, which was traveling from Kiryat Shmona to Tel Aviv.
The blast occurred about five miles inland from Hadera, which is on the Mediterranean coast and near the West Bank.
The Palestinian militant group Islamic Jihad took responsibility for the attack. In a statement sent by fax to The Associated Press office in Beirut, Islamic Jihad said the bombing was in "retaliation for the series of massacres committed by the criminal enemy against our people." It cited recent Israeli military operations in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip that led to the deaths of Palestinian civilians.
Over the weekend, Israeli troops raided houses in the West Bank and arrested several people suspected of being militants, even as Israel eased restrictions in several West Bank cities. The moves came shortly after Prime Minister Ariel Sharon returned from Washington, where President Bush had urged him to ease conditions for Palestinians to help lower tensions as the United States sought support for possible action against Iraq.
In Ramallah, on the West Bank, the Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat issued a statement condemning the bus bombing. "I reject this operation completely," he said. "The Palestinian leadership is against the killing of civilians on both sides."
In Washington, the White House said, "It's another reminder of how it's so important for peace to be pursued and for terror to be stopped." An American envoy, William J. Burns, was already in the region to meet with Israeli and Palestinian leaders this week on an American blueprint for a peace settlement that was given to Mr. Sharon in Washington.
In Luxembourg, the European Union's foreign policy chief, Javier Solana, said he had expressed his "personal distress and my strongest condemnation" of the bombing to the Israeli foreign minister, Shimon Peres, who was holding talks there with the European Union. But, according to Agence France-Presse, Mr. Solana also urged Israel to show restraint in its response and to favor dialogue over retaliation.
There was no immediate indication of how Israel planned to respond.
The attack today resembled another bus bombing in the vicinity of Hadera, in northern Israel, in June, when a car driven by a suicide attacker blew up next to a bus, killing at least 12 people, including the bomber, and wounding dozens more. Two more recent suicide bomb attacks were less successful.
On Oct. 11, the police said security guards outside the United States Embassy in Tel Aviv had captured a would-be Palestinian suicide bomber who fled a crowded seaside cafe after his explosive belt was detected. No one was injured.
A day earlier, a bomber fell trying to board a bus near Tel Aviv. Two people pinned him to the ground while passengers fled. When the bomber did manage explode his belt, he killed himself and a 71- year-old woman and wounded 12 people.

---
