
Ex-Twin Puckett Declares Innocence
By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Filed at 5:06 p.m. ET
MINNEAPOLIS (AP) -- Baseball Hall of Famer Kirby Puckett declared he is innocent of charges he dragged a woman into a restaurant bathroom and groped her.
``Let the process play its course. I know I'm innocent of these charges,'' Puckett said Monday as he left the county jail.
Puckett spent less than a half hour at the jail for a booking procedure and appearance before a judge. Puckett remains free on his own recognizance.
``Hopefully no one rushes to judgment,'' said Todd Jones, an attorney for Puckett.
Prosecutors charged the 41-year-old former Minnesota Twins' star with with a felony count of false imprisonment and a gross misdemeanor count of criminal sexual conduct.
If convicted, Puckett probably would be put on probation and given less than a year in the county workhouse. It's unlikely he would be sentenced to the maximum of four years in prison and $8,000 in fines, County Attorney Amy Klobuchar said last week.
Puckett retired in 1995 after 12 seasons with the Twins, a team he helped win the World Series in 1987 and 1991. He was inducted into the Hall of Fame last year.
According to the complaint, the victim was waiting to use the women's restroom at the restaurant in a Minneapolis suburb on Sept. 6 when Puckett grabbed her by the arm and dragged her into the men's room. She told police that Puckett pushed her into a stall and put his hand on one of her breasts. She said that after a friend of hers yelled into the restroom, Puckett let her go.
Puckett, an executive vice president for the Twins, played in 10 All- Star games during his career, which was cut short by glaucoma. He is blind in his right eye.
He finished with a .318 batting average, the best career mark by a right-handed hitter since Joe DiMaggio. Puckett's 2,040 hits are the most by any player in his first 10 seasons.
During the brief appearance before Judge Gary Larson, Puckett was asked to spell his name and give his address. His attorneys asked if he could do that in private and Larson agreed.
He will formally answer the charges in court later.

---
