

Danish Police Detain Chechen Envoy
By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

Filed at 12:19 p.m. ET

MOSCOW (AP) -- Two more hostages freed from a Moscow theater died from the effects of a gas pumped in during their rescue, health officials said, as politicians praised the Kremlin's handling of the crisis despite the heavy toll.

With the new deaths overnight in hospitals, there were contradictory reports over the total number of hostages killed during the stand-off. Lyubov Zhomova, a spokeswoman for the Moscow health committee, said the deaths brought the total to 119 killed, all but two from the gas. Another official said the total was 120.

Meanwhile, Danish police said they detained a top aide to Chechen rebel President Aslan Maskhadov, after Russia sought his extradition, saying the rebel envoy was suspected of involvement in the hostage-taking, as well as other terrorist attacks.

A judge ordered the aide, Akhmed Zakayev, who was in Copenhagen attending a World Chechen Congress, jailed until Nov. 12 pending an investigation.

Russian President Vladimir Putin has vowed to crack down on ``terrorists'' it says were behind the raid, in which Chechen rebels held the theater for 58 hours until the special forces swept in Saturday. All 50 rebels were killed.

Amid criticism from abroad, Russia broke days of silence over what gas was used. Health Minister Yuri Shevchenko said the gas was based on fentanyl, a fast-acting opiate with many medical applications, including as an anesthetic, Russian news agencies reported.

But in Germany, blood and urine samples from two Germans freed from the theater and since flown home showed traces of halothane, another gas used in anesthetia, the doctor who treated them said Wednesday.

Dr. Thomas Zilker, a toxicology professor at Munich University Clinic, said he believed the incapacitating gas likely contained other substances as well.

U.S. officials have said the knockout gas was an aerosol form of fentanyl or a derivative. The U.S. ambassador to Moscow, Alexander Vershbow, criticized Russia Tuesday for not immediately providing more information about the gas.

``It's clear that perhaps with a little more information at least a few more of the hostages may have survived,'' he said.

In Moscow, families and friends held funerals for victims of the hostage crisis.

At a small chapel at Moscow's Kalitnovo cemetery, Vladimir Zhulyov's relatives were joined by dozens of colleagues of the cellist, who played in the orchestra for the musical and died from the gas.

Zhulyov's mother, Zinaida, and his wife, Yelena, wept as his coffin was lowered into the ground under a cold drizzle.

Across the city, weeping child actors from the musical buried two of their colleagues at the Vagankovo Cemetery: Kristina Kurbatova and Arseny Kurilenko, both 13.

Meanwhile, the two houses of the Russian parliament began their sessions with a moment of silence for the victims of the theater raid.

The lower house, the State Duma, refused to consider a proposal by liberal lawmakers to form an independent commission to investigate how the hostage-takers had penetrated the center of Moscow with large amounts of weapons and explosives and how emergency services responded to the crisis.

The upper house, the Federation Council, voted unanimously to allocate an additional $95 million to fighting terrorism, according to the Interfax news agency.

The chamber also adopted a resolution praising law enforcement agencies ``that saved hundreds of people'' in the theater and vowing to take all necessary measures to fight terrorism.

Russian officials have defended the rescue operation, saying the incapacitating gas was intended to prevent the hostage-takers from triggering explosives strapped to their waists and rigged around the theater.

In a poll of 1,600 Russians taken from Friday to Monday by the All-Russia Center for the Study of Public Opinion, 85 percent of respondents said they approved of Putin's actions during the crisis and 82 percent said they approved of the actions of law enforcement agencies. The poll, which had a margin of error of 3.8 percent, began before the crisis ended.

Former Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev also praised Putin's handling of the crisis.

``In those extreme circumstances that Russia lived through, Putin acted coolly and responsibly. I know it was not easy for him,'' Gorbachev wrote in Wednesday's addition of the official daily Rossiiskaya Gazeta.

The hostage crisis appeared to strengthen public support for the war in Chechnya. Forty-six percent of respondents said the military should continue its campaign in the rebel region; 44 percent said officials should begin peace talks. In September, 34 percent voiced support for continuing the war and 57 percent said talks should begin.

As of Wednesday morning, 230 rescued hostages remained hospitalized, 15 of them in serious condition, the Interfax news agency said. A total of 434 patients had been released to anxious relatives.

Five officers of the special forces who raided the theater were hospitalized, including two who were affected by the gas and two who were in shock, said Sergei Goncharov, head of a special forces' veterans association, according to Interfax.

The U.S. Embassy on Tuesday confirmed the death of hostage Sandy Booker, 49, an electrician from Oklahoma City. U.S. Ambassador Alexander Vershbow said one other American survived.



