

Weiss Jumps and Spins to Men's Title in Paris.
By SAL ZANCA.
PARIS, Nov. 16. .

 After their victories in the singles events today at the Lalique Trophy, Sasha Cohen and Michael Weiss had different ways of communicating with their new coaches.
Cohen was sitting next to hers, Tatyana Tarasova, and heard Tarasova congratulate her in person.
Weiss was interrupted at the beginning of his news conference by a telephone call from his new coach, Don Laws, in Maryland.

"I won, I won the whole thing!" Weiss told him. And what did Laws reply? "Oh my gosh!" Weiss said.
Cohen overtook Yoshie Onda of Japan with a performance that was subpar by her standards.
While the Olympic gold medalist Sarah Hughes rests her injured knee and Michelle Kwan ponders her future, Cohen, an 18-year-old Californian now training on the East Coast, has won two Grand Prix events, both with uneven performances. She won at Skate Canada two weeks ago.
Cohen's victory tonight was not pretty ? she had awkward landings on three jumps and won on her presentation marks. Onda led after Friday's short program, when Cohen missed a double axel jump.
The lack of edge carried over to tonight.
"Sometimes there are nights when you are on and feel electric; today I was not 100 percent," Cohen said. "The jumps were a little shaky, but I was really happy with something I found inside myself, a new piece of character being able to come back and win."
Cohen made a coaching change from John Nicks to Tarasova over the summer. Cohen and her family moved from Laguna Niguel, Calif., to Avon, Conn., so she could train with Tarasova.
Tarasova has coached Olympic gold medalists in men's, pairs and ice dancing, including Aleksei Yagudin at the last Olympics. But this is her first top-class woman.
Cohen hopes to recover from tonight's performance to show the potential that Tarasova saw.
Skating to a piano concerto by Rachmaninoff, Cohen had a rough time, completing only four clean triples and having awkward landings on three others.
Onda fell twice in her routine, including once on a triple axel attempt. She still landed six other triples to mark in the 5.5 to 5.8 range for technical merit.
Yet her presentation scores were only 5.2 to 5.7. Cohen's were 5.7 to 5.9.
That was enough to give Cohen all firsts in the free skating portion and move her into first over all.
Cohen now heads to the Cup of Russia in Moscow next week. The victory here qualified her for the Grand Prix final in St. Petersburg, Russia, at the beginning of March, three weeks before the world championships in Washington.
In the men's event, Weiss vaulted from fifth to first with one of the best free-skating performances of his career.
Weiss has struggled recently, but today he landed seven triples and barely missed two quads to win the free skate and take his first major competition since the 2000 United States nationals.
"I have moved from fifth to second and seventh to second but never from fifth to first," Weiss said. "I was happy after the two quads to keep focused. It was a good way to finish my Grand Prix season."
Weiss came to Paris only as a substitute for Timothy Goebel, who had to withdraw with a hip injury.
Weiss nearly landed a quad lutz, slightly two-footing it as he did with the quad toe loop seconds later. Then he did not miss anything else and received marks from 5.3 to 5.8 for technical merit and 5.6 to 5.9 for presentation.
Zhang Min of China, who did a quad salchow and quad toe loop, was second and Takeshi Honda of Japan was third. Brian Joubert of France who led after the short program, fell twice and dropped to fifth.
Yelena Grushina and Ruslan Goncharov of Ukraine won their third ice dance competition of the season. They earned the first 6.0 of the season, for presentation.
Under the random judging, however, no one knows if it counted. It did not even help them get all the firsts as one of their placements was a third in the free dance.

---
