Using Tools

It is not possible to give safety guidelines to cover every do it yourself manual. The information about basic tools is intended to assist the inexperienced worker, to help prevent accidents. The prime concern is not to focus on correct DIY techniques, nor to avoid damage to a piece of work, but to try to ensure the safety of the user of the tool. Experienced handypersons may find some of the information a little obvious, but should still benefit from a few reminders on safety!

The work area

Do not leave tools lying around. Try to be methodical about putting them away. A toolbox or special cupboard will do, if you do not fancy the idea of special racks. Put protective covers on, especially on piercing tools like bradawls and knives and chisels. If knife blades are removable, discard them at the end of working. You will probably want a new blade next time you use the knife. Try to be tidy. You will find things more easily, lower the injury risk of searching through piles of tools or tripping over them and make your tools last longer.

The floor

Keep floors as clear as you can, especially the immediate area where you expect to be working. Keep dust sheets flat and make sure they do not slip on the floor below. Do not leave flexes and extension cables trailing about. If you spill any liquids, mop them up at once.

Lighting

Keep the area well lit, with natural light when possible. Supplement this with inspection lights, spotlights or domestic lighting, bearing in mind the possibilities of electrocution and fire. If fixing permanent work area lighting, consider low voltage options. Fixed apppliances could have their own separate illumination nearby. Do not work in your shadow.

Ventilation

Ventilation is vitally important in several ways. You must not expose yourself or others to clouds of dust or fumes while working. Dust is a long term health hazard and breathing protection should be worn. Damp the floor before sweeping up, or use a mop. Do not sweep the dust when dry, you will only recirculate it and do not use a domestic vacuum cleaner. Vacuum cleaners trap larger particles of dust but smaller ones can pass straight through the machine and become airborne again. If you have a permanent work area, investing in an extractor fan would be a good idea.

Fumes also pose severe health risks. The fumes of some substances may be carcinogenic in the long term. In the short term they may make you drowsy and incapable of using power tools safely. Open windows and doors and try to get air moving through the work area. An accumulation of certain dusts and fumes may also present a risk of explosion.  
           
Noise

Avoid excessive levels of noise and wear hearing protectors whenever necessary. Do not operate noisy machinery for long periods of time without a break.

Remember

If the noise is loud enough you won't be able to hear whatever else is going on around you. The doorbell or phone may ring. Someone may call for help. The vibration could cause an object to fall from a shelf, out of your line of vision, and onto a heater. Accident records show that almost anything is possible.

Warning

Children and pets should be excluded from the work area. All tools and chemicals should be locked out of the reach of children when not in use.
     
Clearing up

At the end of the work period try to clear the floor and tidy up tools and materials. Fix lids on paint and chemicals. Switch off and unplug tools, appliances and heaters. Look round to see that everything is safe to be left. Depending on how dirty the job has been have a thorough wash or shower, not forgetting your hair and fingernails. Even the smallest traces of some toxic substances could be injurious over a period of time.

Remember

If disposing of any DIY rubbish in household rubbish collections make sure it is all safe. Young children and pets seem to like rubbish bags. You should not use the domestic waste system for toxic or dangerous substances. Wrap up broken glass or knife blades. Sharp objects may pierce the refuse sack and badly cut hands or legs, maybe yours.

Basic Tools

The use of even traditional workshop tools is risky. As new tools are added to the toolbox, the only way to familiarize yourself with them is to use them. Suppliers, manufacturers and regular or professional tool users may be able to advise you.

Hammers

Hammers are for driving in nails and tacks. Depending on the style of hammer, one side of the head performs the basic nailing task. The other may be a narrow rectangular head for coping with small nails too delicate for normal hammer blows, or for nailing into mouldings.

A rounded head is really for use with sheet metal.

The more common claw head is for removing protruding or badly driven nails.

Do not use hammers to bash wooden or plastic handled tools such as chisels or screwdrivers.                                       

Cheap or thin handled claw hammers should be avoided. They may snap when you are trying to pull out deep or stubborn nails.

Warning

If you miss with a hammer and the handle takes the blow behind the head, the handle may snap and the head may fly off.

Do not raise the hammer excessively. Several medium blows are better than a couple of very hefty ones. 
	
Always check that the handle is sound and the head well fixed. 

Mallets are for tapping wood or plastic handled tools such as chisels or for tapping joints together when assembling joinery. 

Rubber or leather faced hammers are available for more delicate work. 

Heavy club hammers are used with special chisels to chip into concrete, bricks or paving slabs.

Warning

If using a club hammer and cold chisel on stone or very hard surfaces, always wear eye protection and strong gloves.                 

Debris has an uncanny knack of finding your eyes.

A misdirected blow could damage your hand.

Watch out for the burrs which occur on the chisel top after a while. These could cut a hand or break and fly off. File them down.

Screwdrivers

Square ended screwdrivers should fit the screws you are using them for. It is worth having more than one size or a good quality set with interchangeable bits.

Ordinary screwdrivers can be hard work. Blisters are common.

Rachet screwdrivers are handy. You do not have to release your grip. Most are adjustable to provide the rachet action for screwing or unscrewing, plus a fixed position to allow for use as a conventional screwdriver.

Spiral rachet screwdrivers are a must for the serious DIY enthusiast or professional, but use with care. When released, these tools shoot out to full length and could easily take out an eye or pierce the skin. Never point towards your face or at anyone. Slips with these tools can often be very nasty. Keep an eye on where the bit will go if you do slip.

With spiral rachet screwdrivers, close the tool for final tightening of screws. Most have interchangeable bits.

Cross headed screwdrivers should also fit the screws that they are used for. In practice, only one small electrical one and a larger type are needed. Electrical screwdrivers should offer genuine protection from accidents and electricity. Handles should be shielded with rubber. Some double as testers. A neon, or similar, in the handle lights up if the screwdriver touches a live terminal or wire. Never work on appliances which are connected to the main supply. Never work on a live circuit.

Chisels

If you intend to use chisels, perhaps to cut a slot for a hinge or to fit a lock, one is not enough. You will need several. Store them safely, either with the ends covered or in a rack, and keep them very sharp. A blunt chisel requires force and accidents are common. Sharpening is a critical process involving an oilstone, and can take a lot of practice. Always remove wood patiently in small amounts, not by digging and gouging. If a chisel is sharp it should do the work for you.

Awls

Whether square ended or pointed, they may be good enough to make pilot holes for screws in softwood. 

Keep them sharp. 

Do not use a lot of pressure. 

Do not get in the line of fire if you slip.

Never work into your hand or on your lap.

Protect tips and your fingers by jamming a cork on the points when not in use.

Saws

There is a wide variety of saws. They must be kept sharp and rust free. Saws with big teeth are intended to rip through soft wood quickly. Smaller teeth imply finer work, possibly for plywood or chipboard. The shape of the teeth may mean that more wood is removed on the downward stroke. A dealer will advise you for your specific needs. Tenon saws are for cutting joints in joinery and fine work on smaller jobs requiring more care. Most have a strengthening bar along the top edge of the blade, which restricts the depth of cut, so you won't be able to saw sheet materials.

Hacksaws

A hacksaw is a basic tool for cutting metal bars or strips, angle iron, metal and plastic pipes. The frame holds the blade taut. Do not overtighten, you may cause it to snap. Some types allow for the blade to be set at different angles. The frame limits the depth of cut possible, when it hits the workpiece, you have gone as far as you can. It is not suitable for sheet metal, unless you are making small straight cuts at the edges. The blade should point downwards, away from the top of the frame, not upwards. Cutting pressure should be on the forward stroke, away from you. Keep your free hand on top of the frame, at the front, away from you, to steady and guide the saw.

Try to use long controlled strokes. Try to anchor the workpiece in a vice. Small hacksaws are called junior hacksaws. If you are cutting hard steel, they are not really strong enough. Change blades regularly and ask a dealer for advice. There are different types and qualities of blade for different jobs or degrees of finish. Never use if the blade is twisted or cracked.

Files

Most are designed to remove material on the forward stroke. Some have removable handles. Never use without the handle. It is quite possible  to drive the unprotected point right into your hand. Tap the file handle downwards on the bench to make sure the handle is secure. Hold the handle firmly, steadying the other end with the tips of your fingers. Use a steady even pressure. Do not work fast. Be patient and let the tool do the work. If the face of the tool becomes clogged, give it a good stiff brushing.

Craft knives

Basically a sturdy handle, which can be opened to allow a new blade to be fitted. Choose one that suits your grip. Retractable blade options are a good idea, if the knife is good quality. Blade covers that come with  non retractable types get lost, or do not fit the other blade shapes that are available. The blade cover could also come off, in a pocket, perhaps. Always change the blade as soon as it becomes inefficient. You should not have to use excessive pressure. The blade is supposed to do the work. Always buy the correct blades for the make of handle. A sloppy fit is no good. Some of the specialist blade shapes are useful but also quite deadly. Never twist or gouge with the blade. The tip might break and fly off. Remove material slowly, not in large chunks. Always remove the blade from non retractable types when putting them away. Smaller craft knives are advisable for smaller or more delicate jobs. There is a wide range available. You hold the handle more like a pencil and use a lot less pressure. Use the right tool for the right job.

Remember

If throwing away knife blades, make sure you wrap them well to save nasty accidents. Picking up a rubbish bag, or brushing a leg against it, could cause a severe injury.

Tool Rules

Always use a tool for the job it was designed to do. Always use tools correctly. If it feels very awkward, stop. Keep hands and other parts of the body out of direct line of fire. Do not use excessive force. Keep sharp tools sharp. Check all tools for strength and safety. Store all tools safely. Out of the reach of children.

Power Tools

There's a wide choice of makes and types of tool. The more expensive, top-of-the-range ones are usually intended for heavy-duty or professional use. The lower priced should be fine for occasional home use as long as they are of good quality. Often the first thing to fail, especially on drills, is the on off switch from constant stopping and starting!

Power tools must be cleaned and serviced. How often depends on how often you use or abuse them. There are service departments of all the major manufacturers practically everywhere.





